FINDING YOUR UNDERLINES
by Richard S. Williams, PAKUP, December 1986

(How to change the WordStar search wildcard from ^S)

WordStar marks underlining with ^S before and after the
underlined string, but does not display the underlining on
screen, even with newer Kaypros, so it is easy to "lose" an
underlined passage by forgetting the second ^S until you are
printing and find half your book in underlines.  Unfortunately,
you can use Wordstar's search function to look for anything but
the missing ^S because the search function designates ^S as a
wild card.  Well, Albert J. Klee of Fayetteville, OH has
discovered the relevant bytes, and by making a simple change in
your WSOVLY.OVR file, you can change the wildcard and thus search
for the ^S.  First, you must designate a substitute wildcard.
Ted Silveira (Profiles, Nov. 1986) suggests ^Y, Bernadette
Freedman (Profiles, Dec./Jan. 1986/87) suggests using ^L.
Whatever you decide, you need the hexadecimal equivalent for it
(^L=OC, ^Y=19).  Then you need to make the patch.  To do this,
you should have a spare disk with a copy of WS.COM and its
overlay files (never try to patch a file on anything but a copy)
and DDT.COM.  It will be helpful later to have NSWEEP.COM or
PIP.COM on the disk too, so you can copy the files onto your
working copy of WordStar.  I'm assuming here you have WordStar
version 3.3.

At the A-prompt, type:  DDT WSOVLY.OVR <ret>.  The program will
respond:
     DDT VERS. 2.2
     NEXT  PC
     8400  0100
     -
At the hyphen (DDT's prompt) you type in 'L20DC' and DDT will
respond with some strange readouts starting with CPI 13.  If so,
all is well, (if not, quit), and you can go on by typing what
appears in brackets, ([], but don't type the brackets
themselves.)  The other text is what the software displays.

  -[S20DD]          (That is 'two zero dee dee'.  Caps never
                    matter, by the way)
  20DD 13  [19]     (You enter '19'.  This is for ^Y, enter 0C
                    (zero cee) for ^L)
  20DE CA  [.]      (You enter a period)
  -[G0]             (that's 'gee zero', not the word go)
  A0>[SAVE 131 WSOVLY1.OVR <ret>]
                    (save the new version at the A: prompt)

Now try it out, testing the new wildcard character on the search
functions (^QF and ^QA) as well as searching for underline sets.
If it works, you need to copy this new overlay file onto your
working copy of WordStar (use PIP or NSWEEP).

For those of you with MS-DOS, the corresponding change would be
as follows:

  [DEBUG WSOVLY1.OVR <ret>]
  -[E 20D5]
  5533:20D5 13[.19] (this is for ^Y, enter 0C (zero C) for ^L)
  [W]
  Writing A100 bytes
  [Q]

There you have it.  By the way, NewWord doesn't have the problem
because it handles wildcards differently.  Next month I'll have
more on searches in WordStar and NewWord.
