TOPIC :  MDM712 PHONE MODEM PROGRAM GENERAL INTEREST DATA

FROM  :  IRV HOFF W6FFC

DATE  :  27 JULY 83


     MDM712 is the latest in the "MODEM7" telephone modem series.  After
MODEM 7.98, the program became known as MDM700, etc.  At that time the
external macro library was combined into the source code plus other
changes.  Numerous overlay files were added for various computers to
make the program useful for a large number of different systems.  Orig-
inally it worked only with the PMMI plug-in modem for the S-100 bus.  It
now also supports the Hayes 300 and 1200 and U. S. Robotics modems.  It
is the only modem program that offers auto-dialing and auto-continuous
redialing for all these modems.  It also supports up to two different
alternate long distance systems such as 'ALLNET', 'MCI' or 'SPRINT'.  It
can also auto-dial for TYNMET, etc.

     Overlay files are included for  Apple, (several versions), Altos,
Datapoint 1560, Heath H89, Heath -100 series, Hewlett Packard 125, In-
terfacer 3/4, Kaypro, Morrow, NEC, Osborne OS-1, Osborne Executive One,
Otrona, PMMI, Telecon Zorba, Televideo, Xerox and Zenith Z90 and -100
series.  There is also a "general purpose" overlay to readily adapt to
other systems not mentioned.  An additional file makes it simple to
change the phone number library.  Others are being added that may not
be mentioned in this list.

     The MDM712.UPD file lists the most recent changes that have been
added to the program.  MDM712.INF explains what each of the programs is
for, plus has some comments similar to these, regarding how to use the
overlays in the easiest manner.  Under normal circumstances you would
have no need for the source code, as the overlays have the beginning of
the program.  This includes all the various options you may select.

     Let's say you have a Heath H89, for example.  You would wish to get
(download) the following files:

     MDM712.COM		(Master object code, ready to use for PMMI)
     M712H8.ASM		(Heath overlay file)
     M712NM.ASM		(to easily change the phone number library
			   if using the Smartmodem or Robotics)

and perhaps MDM712.UPD (update file) and MDM712.DOC (instruction manual):

     You would then edit the options in M712H8.ASM if not already set
the way you prefer, then assemble it (ASM.COM is fine).  Refer to the
instructions in the overlay file to combine the MDM712.COM file with the
M712H8.HEX file you just got when assembling M712H8.ASM.  All this will
only take a few minutes.   It is actually very simple.  The program is
then ready to use.  If unfamilar with this type modem program, read the
MDM712.DOC file and try it out.

     0103H  FF for PMMI, 00 if not PMMI
     0104H  FF for Hayes Smartmodem 300 or 1200 or US Robotics
     0105H  54 for touch-tone dialing or 50 for pulse-dialing
                   (only applicable for the Hayes or Robotics)	

     These bytes are automatically selected when edited into the approp-
riate overlay.


					- Irv Hoff
