******* REVIEW, REKUG Newsletter, Vol. 2, No. 12, December 1985 *******

A FILE SAVING TIP ......................................... Carl Davies

Here's a little tip that I feel is so important that you should cut out
this paragraph and glue it into a safe place for a BDOS emergency.  From
time to time you will hear of someone losing a file to a BDOS error
message for some unknown reason.  The only way to get out of it is to
push the reset button and if you haven't saved your file then your work
is assumed to be lost.  This tip applies only to Perfect Writer,
WordStar or any other ASCII file, since bit files would be rather
difficult to re-construct.

Anyway here's the tip.  From the A> or B> prompt enter the following
command:

  A>SAVE 228 MEMORY <RETURN>     or...    A>SAVE 228 B:MEMORY <RETURN>

This command will result in a 57K file on the disk with the filename
MEMORY and it will contain all of the TPA portion of your computer's
memory.  TPA means "transient program area."  This is the area that
contains any program that you run whether it be WordStar, Perfect
Writer, MBASIC or whatever.

Once you have the MEMORY file on disk, a good disk editing program can
be used to locate and recover your lost file.  You cannot load this file
with a word processor since it also contains control characters.  This
file saving tip will only work if the SAVE command is initiated
immediately after the BDOS error has occurred and not having turned the
machine off or if you didn't run another program.

If you do not know how to use a disk editor then that's the beauty of
the REKUG group.  Bring your disk that contains the MEMORY file to the
next club meeting and someone like myself can help you or you can call
me in an extreme emergency.  In Santa Rosa... 538-0691.
