
 ************
NEIL.SMITH [Sysop]  
Sub: Help for Geneva, Starlet, & CP/M       

This Topic is for help questions and answers regarding using GEnie with  the
NEC Starlet, Epson Geneva, and any other CP/M laptop.  Please use  Category 1
for more general GEnie help questions.
 ************
 ------------
 Sun Dec 06, 1987
K.REGESTER  
 
I am having trouble d-loading with my Starlet. I am using the N0DE disk drive
and get timeout errors every other Block due to disk writes  I have tried
using IMP245 but can't quite get it configured, what are the locations of the
Baud Rate generator on the the starlet??? and which type of IO chips does it
use??? I have a copy of MAC and RMAC for my C-128 so I can reassemble the
ovrerlays for IMP.. I guess I really need a memory map for the  Starlet. Any
help???????


....._=< Ken >=-
 ------------
 Sun Dec 06, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Ken:

   What luck have you had with the built-in Telcom program? It's been very
reliable for me, but I don't have disk drives.  T'would be my suggestion to
use the built-in, with Xmodem activated, then download to your RAM
transferring to disk after disconnect.  But t'would seem to me download to
disk should be supported with the resident Telcom program.

 Starlet-ing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Mon Dec 07, 1987
K.REGESTER  
 
Thnx fer reply, I have been trying to xfer from my C-128 and Amiga to     the
Starlet and the files are too big to d-load to ram disk. Using 2400 baud seems
to work fairly well but i still get timeout errors every other block due to
the N0DE drive grabbing the system bus (I think!!) I can get a generic version
of IMP245 to work if I set the baud rate using TELCOM then load IMP and go
from there, TELCOM is not very forgiving to timimg of the ACK/NAK and it's
real easy for the Starlet to end up cancelling the d-load due to too many
errors. I t does it here also if I don't use the RAM disk. (I like big
files!!!) On another subject, I have gotten a lot of the CP/M 2.2 and 3.0
stuff to work on the NEC Like Eprolog Algol, etc.. MAC and RMAC work
great!!!!!! So if I can get a memory map.. I be off and running. I especially
need the port configuration specs, and info on the ROM banking system. THNXS  
---- -=< Ken >=- I'll upload the C interpreter and a few other languages out
of their   libraries so those that don't have either the Disk drive or RAM
carts can play too. I want to work out a driver to use the Commodore 1571  on
the RS-232 (Lets you use all the CP/M 5.25 formats)
 ------------
 Mon Dec 07, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Ken:

   We'll be MOST interested in any/all files you have for the Starlet! Having
just recently obtained a Starlet, I'm being very careful about publishing
material in a manner usable by folks with only 32K when possible, and marking
the goodies that need 64K mode as such.

 8401-ing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Thu Dec 31, 1987
K.REGESTER  
 
Sorry I had to delete files 1504 and 1503 they didn't work on the starlet!!!
If you are having trouble, I am sorry the .doc file is for a Mbasic PILOT
program, the Zpilot.com file glitches out on input's so I trashed it...
 ------------
 Sun Jan 10, 1988
J.JOHN  
 
Hi, I have a NEC Starlet PC-8401A-LS.  I does not hold any RAM memory when
switched off.  Could the internal nicad be bad? It is a Yuasa Battery, catalog
number 4-226FT-P.  Help!!!


 ------------
 Sun Jan 10, 1988
P.CLEVELAND [Grover]  
 
J. John I just went through this with another Starlet that had been  in a
closet for some months. First, does it hold memory when the charger is plugged
in? If so, the battery may just need time to recharge. If, after the machine
has been charging for some time, the memory is still not held, then there is a
good possibility the battery is bad. good luck, Grover [WT6P]
 ------------
 Sun Jan 10, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
J.John and Grover:

  Hmmmm, my Starlet had been sitting on a shelf for eons when I got it and I
had no difficulties at all. Could it make a difference if it was turned off
with no C batteries installed? That is what I'm using, so that is all I can
think of!

 Mumblattering ...
  the Laptops way ...
                    .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sun Mar 13, 1988
A.LAVIOLETTE  
 
I have a problem exactly the same as described in Topic 18 concerning the
showing up of my programs in the menu. I always use the AC adapter with my
NiCad rechargeable batteries left in the computer Starlet computer. ? Or
shhould I take the batteries out of the computer when I use the adapter?
Replies concerning similar problems would be appreciated. Andre.
 ------------
 Sun Mar 13, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Andre:

  Having no experience with NiCad for the Starlet, I'll have to be satisfied
with pointing you to the files 909 and 933 in Library 8 which discuss and help
with NiCad battery usage in the Starlet.

 Pointing ....
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sat Apr 23, 1988
R.PREUSS  
 
I recently purchased a NEC PC-8500 I have some questions that hopefully some
one can answer.  First some back ground information.

I almost purchased a Tandy 1400LT PC compatible laptop but I couldn't justify
the $$$.  While reading a magazine I saw the NEC PC-8500 and for $310 it was
mine(mail order).  I figured at that price I couldn't go wrong.  I use my
Apple ][e to store the 8500's files using xmodem up loading and down loading.

How old is this model? (Not that it matters that much but I'm curious)

Does anyone have a recommendation for a, battery operated, portable printer? 
I was considering the Hewlett-Packard ThinkJet or Diconix 150.  Both of these
printers are available with either serial or parallel interfaces (the HP
serial version is not battery operated). I would like a parallel printer but,
I don't know if I can but the NEC parallel cable (PC-8494A).  Is this cable
still available from NEC? I've written to NEC asking for the location of the
closest NEC dealer but haven't received a reply yet.

Where would I find more information about .COM file types? This type of file
is briefly described in the user's guide as executable file. What type of code
does it execute?  Can I use WordStar-To-Go to create and edit a .COM file?

Thanks in advance for any help.

Bob
 ------------
 Sat Apr 23, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Bob:

  1) For a parallel printer cable, you can use the Tandy/Radio Shack model
supplied for the Model 100/Tandy 102. T'is #26-1409 for $14.95

  2) Nope - no can prepare .COM files from WordStar to go. Those programs are
prepared with assembly language or QBasic or ZBasic or C compiler programming;
most of that is rather sophisticated.

  3) Suspect you may need to acquire a memory expansion unit from NODE Systems
- your 8500 is rather limited if you can only operate in 32k mode.

  4) There are a lot of programs here that are for the 8401 and therefore are
just fine for your 8500 - most others here will NOT work. In Library 8 use
Starlet as your search word for programs specifically for your computer.

 Lotza fun ....
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sat Apr 30, 1988
R.PREUSS  
 
^Dave^: Thanks for your help. I'm new to the Laptop world and your reply is
very helpful. I'll check out Library 8 for some programs and buy the cable.
Could you tell me how to contact NODE Systems?  Thanks again for your help.
 Bob
 ------------
 Sat Apr 30, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Bob:
    Node Systems Inc. is in Grass Valley; CA = 1-916-477-6706 and tell them
where you heard!!

 RAMpac-ing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
Category 5,  
Message 16        Wed May 11, 1988
M.WADE3                      at 21:13 EDT
 
Irying to decide between the Starlet and the PX-8.  Both being liquid-a ated
for around $450 including 120K or so RAM disk.  I'm a writer, use a CPM Kaypro
for word processing, and need something to take notes on and possibly write a
bit with on the road.  Any advice would be welcome. I'm a little worried by
the number of technical questions and problems I see mentioned on this board. 
Am I throwing my money away?  Thanks.
 ------------
 Wed May 11, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
  Though I have both [in order to provide support here], neither would be my
laptop of choice in the $200-$500 range. Between the two, I'd make no
particular recommendation.  Very BEST thing for anyone to do that is
considering these computers is to call around, locate a user group or store
that can direct you to someone that has the computer, then get some hands on
testing that-a-way before buying.
   To give some wee form of guidance, here is listing of what each comes with
AS A STRIPPED DOWN, no extras, computer:
 1) Epson PX-8 - Built-in micro-cassette recorder, 64K, two serial ports [no
parallel port], CP/M utility ROM and BASIC ROM should be part of the stripped
version but NOT the WordStar ROM. 8 x 80 LCD screen.
 2) Starlet NEC PC-8401A - 64k, 16 x 80 LCD screen, WordStar, Telcom that
includes Xmodem protocol, spreadsheet, personal Filer, serial port, parallel
port, and CP/M.

   In checking files and writing programs, I've used external disk drives with
both of them - slow. Also I've use 128K RAMpack from Node Systems on the
Starlet, very nice. Problem is that EACH has definite strengths and each has
definite weaknesses; each person must choose according to their needs.

 Good luck ...
    the Laptops way ...
                      .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Mon May 16, 1988
GUY.T.RICE  
 
I can't comment on the NEC, since I have never used it, but all in all, I've
been very pleased with my Epson PX-8.  I have a 120K RAM disk an one external
3.5" disk for it...it's a useful and reliable machine, and best of all, it's
small and light.  (I have an IBM PC Convertable, but the thing is heavy and
rather large.  Same goes for all MS-DOS laptops that I know of, including the
T1000....besides, I believe you said you use CP/M, so you probably don't want
one of the MS-DOS things anyway...)

GTR
 ------------
 Thu May 19, 1988
P.CLEVELAND [Grover]  
 
I'm very pleased with my little Starlet. I bought the memory expansion from
Node (necessary for the amount of work I do) and would do it all over again.
Good luck.
 ------------
 Sun Jul 24, 1988
MFS  
 
If anyone is interested in developing some programs for the 8500 I'd like to
see some more games available.  Preferably with good action and graphics if
possible.  I amagine programming the 8500 for this type of thing is pretty
tricky, so I wish you lots - o - luck.

-Mark-
 ------------
 Sun Jul 24, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Mark:
    Glad to hear of the interest in programs, games included! As you say, it
is "pretty tricky" but CAN be done with ZBASIC from ZedCor. Have you seen the
BOXES.COM, BDVIEW.COM, and GRAPHICS.COM in Library 8 that are specifically for
the Starlet 8401/8500??
    How much RAM do you have for your 8500 and did you get disk drive?
 Starlet-ing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sun Jul 31, 1988
MFS  
 
Hello Dave: Yes I've seen Boxes & BDView.  I agree, it is amazing stuff for a
machine not designed with graphics in mind. I have the 128K cart, but not the
drive. Thanks. -Mark-
 ------------
 Thu Mar 16, 1989
CAROL  
 
This file is the definition for the program 22DISK to format, read, and write
3 1/2" CP/M disks for the Starlet/PC8500 on an MSDOS computer.  

BEGIN
  NEC4  NEC PC-8500 - SSDD 96 tpi 3.5" DENSITY
  MFM,LOW CYLINDERS
  80 SIDES
  1 SECTORS
  16,256 SIDE1 0
  1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16 BSH 4  BLM 15 EXM 1  DSM 151  DRM 127
AL0 0C0H  AL1 0  OFS 4 END

Run the file through GENINDEX and after renaming your CPMDISKS.DEF file rename
this file CPMDISKS.DEF

It will permit you to read and write disks.  The manual of 22DISK will explain
the parameters and you can give them to any CP/M software house to get disks
in your size or use them in a 5 1/4 and 3 /12 machine (MSDOS) to transfer
software, etc. Specify disk type code as NEC4 when usinf 22DISK.

Discovered this in trying to trade disks with a fellow author who uses  a
PC8500.  If you don't have 22DISK and use CP/M it is worth the  download.

 ------------
 Sat Mar 18, 1989
D.WALTERS6  
 
Is there a program like this to read and write disks using an AMIGA 500 rather
than a MS/DOS machine?
 ------------
 Sun Apr 09, 1989
J.LEVINSON  
 
Do you know if the Radio Shack disk drives for the 1oo will work with the
8401?8401?
 ------------
 Sun Apr 09, 1989
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]          at 23:33 EDT
 
Yep! Shur 'nuff know! The Shack disk drive will NOT work with Starlet.
 Sorry 'bout that ...
     the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.

[Editor note: but a program became available 5/13/89 to use Tandy Disk
  
 ------------
 ************
Sat Feb 14, 1987
NEIL.SMITH [Sysop]
Sub: Uploads For Geneva, Starlet, CP/M      

Please use this Topic to announce uploaded files for the Geneva, Starlet,  or
any other CP/M laptop.  This will alert the sysops to release your  files, and
will alert other members to the new goodies.
 ************
 ------------
 Sun Nov 01, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 Starlet alert!

  Wheeee ooooooO! L'il Starlet joined our silicone pets this past Wednesday
and we promptly decided that no Basic was unacceptable.

  Result? SLOTS.INT just uploaded for the benefit of all you folks that have
yearned for the magnificent slot machine game available for other computers
but not the Starlet.

  ERUN.COM is required for all *.INT files; syntax is: A>ERUN.COM SLOTS.INT or
whatever the *.INT filename. Just made ERUN.COM available alone in Library 8
for those lacking in sufficient RAM to download EBASIC.LBR and extract the
program.

  More programs in the works for the Starlet; business applications next.
 Stay tuned!

 CP/M-ing ...
    the Laptops way ...
                      .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Thu Nov 05, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
  Promises, promises ....

     and we keep them too!

 BUSINESS.INT, COMUFLT.COM, CRC.COM, DLCR.LBR, LOTTO.INT, and SLOTS.INT
  are just some of the programs published here for the Starlet in the
  past week - those with .COM extension should run on Epson PX-8, but
  I'm fairly certain that the .INT programs are Starlet specific.

 More to follow ...
    the Laptops way ...
                      .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Thu Dec 24, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Ken:  [K.REGESTER]

  Thankee for the ZPILOT upload. Programming for the Starlet has led me more
towards BASIC-E [or EBASIC] and the ZBasic compiler. Didn't look very hard,
yet, at the ZPILOT capabilities.

  We'll be MOST interested in your .PIL files that you prepare for the
Starlet! Surely we'll get goodies up and running for the new Starlet owners
and growing membership here.

 Zpiloting ...
    the Laptops way ...
                      .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Thu Dec 31, 1987
K.REGESTER  
 
I mentioned it on topic #1, but I repeat here. Files 1503 and 1504 are trashed
so I deleted them. They don't work on the starlet (ZPILOT.COM) and the doc
file is for another version of PILOT that needs Mbasic to run. Sorry all that
D-loaded them I messed up. I did upload ZBASIC.COM #1536 and ZBASIC.DOC #1537
The northStar Basic re-write. It does work on the 32k or 64k Starlet and
leaves 10k workspace in 32k mode! The syntax is different from MBasic but it's
free!! and is an Interpreter so I de-libraried it and u-loaded it. -=< Ken >=-
[KJ4ZF/KL7}
 ------------
 Thu Dec 31, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Ken:

  Not to confuse the issue [hopefully], I've re-named #1536 to ZBAS.COM which
is it's name when run and #1538 to ZBAS.DOC.  Partly what is involved is that
I'm writing programs in ZBasic, a trademark of ZedCor, and methinks folks
could be misled into thinking I'd written them in the ZBAS program derived
from NorthStar Basic.

  Kinda interesting that you've chosen to work in ZBAS - will be most
interested in your results. Somehow I thought that EBASIC [or BASIC-E] might
be better for the Starlet and that is why I first published those files and
the resulting .INT programs here.

  Have you successfully created an "auto-run" program as explained in
paragraph 5 near the end of the documentation?

  Methinks that ZBAS and EBASIC share some weaknesses, such as the lack of
INKEY$ and INPUT$(), so it will be interesting to find which has the greater
strengths for Starlet users. Know from experience that EBASIC requires MUCH
patience!

 Programming ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sat Jan 02, 1988
K.REGESTER  
 
Sure got the E-Basic right on the money. I thought that ZBAS had less overhead
and since it's an interpreter, it'd be easier on the uninitiated (*me too!) I
played around with it some more and really enjoy it. I have also tryied B-
Basic compiler since I have MBasic for CP/M. Not really great results. how do
you like ZBasic the interpiler ???? -=< Ken >=-
 ------------
 Sat Jan 02, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Ken:

  ZBasic is just fine, though it too takes some getting used to. Major problem
with it is the overhead required since the .COM file has to carry with it the
entire ZBasic command set. Thus, a ZBasic program that says "Hye dere Ken"
would require 12K as a .COM program. This greatly cuts down the possibilities
for the 32K mode folks. ASCII.COM took a lot of sweat and tears to get running
in 32K mode; it is a subset of STARLET.COM which requires 64K mode.

  Note that BASIC-E requires less overhead for the program USER than does your
ZBAS.COM since all the user requires is ERUN.COM. Could make a big difference
in a large program intended for 32K mode users.

  Will be looking forward to your ZBAS creations for us!

 Programming ...
  the Laptops way ...
                    .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Mon Jan 04, 1988
K.REGESTER  
 
I am trying some applications in B-Basic (BCBC.LBR on CP/M SIG) but it seems
glitched. It offers a major improvement on all the above since it creates .ASM
files foassembly by MAC or ASM. Alas it seems to crash fairly well on it's own
commands and requires MBASIC to run. I am learning Z-80 assembly in the hopes
to get it working I really need a bios and bdos map for the Starlet The ones
for normal CP/M 2.2 seem off on most functions.... Any help ???? -=< Ken >=-
the starlet hacker......
 ------------
 Mon Jan 04, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Ken:

  Methinks the very best bet would be to call 1-800-NEC-SOFT and get a copy of
"The Starlet Technical Notebook for the PC-8401A."  Unlike many such manuals
for Japanese products, this one was prepared here in the United States by the
Personal Computer Division, NECHE.  Steve Sarna was one of the folks involved -
a name known to NEC PC-8201A users.
 Believe the Manual is $20.

 Programming ...
   the Laptops way ...
                      .^Dave^.
 p.s.
 Is DDT any help from the Library here? It runs fine, but a lot of it is
beyond my poor capabilities. That's files 1468-1470.
 ------------
 Thu Jan 07, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Ken:

  Just played with your disassembler upload, MSA15.COM.  Worked just fine on
the Starlet in 32K mode.

  Used it on ASCII.COM --- though I wrote that program, I can't make head or
tails out of the resultant disassembly! Me oh my! One of these days perhaps
I'll learn assembly, but ....

 Chwikkling along ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Mon Jan 18, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 Starlet folks with 64K mode capability will be interested in the ZBasic
demonstration program now available. ZBDEMLAP.LBR contains the demo program
from Zedcor, plus a READ.ME containing Starlet configuration tips [as figured
out by me], and STARLET.BAS the source code for STARLET.COM that has been here
a few months.

 Note that the demo program does not provide for compiling and has certain
other limitations as well - not to speak of the lack of documentation!
 The ZBasic manual is 360 pages, plus appendices. The Z-80 appendix is only 22
pages, but the Macintosh's runs to 206 pages.

 Files should be extracted from ZBDEMLAP.LBR using DE-LBR.COM and then
unsqueezed with UNSQ.COM - both in Library 8.

 ZBasicing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Wed May 04, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 The Mona Lisa? Humphrey Bogart? Mickey Mouse?

 Yes! They are all available for the Starlet 8401 or 8500 with 64K mode. See
BDVIEW.COM; must prepare a file called VIEWS.DO with your WordStar non-text
mode. VIEWS.DO contains the number of BDVIEW files on your disk and their
filenames. The BDVIEW files must contain the names as they are published here
in Library 5 though BDVIEW.COM is in Library 8. Example of a proper VIEWS.DO
file is thus:
 5,L&H,NUDE1,FAB4_2,FACES,MONA

 With a VIEWS.DO file like that, then L&H.DO, NUDE1.DO, FAB4_2.DO, FACES.DO
and MONA.DO from Library 5 would have to be on your default drive with the
BDVIEW.COM program. What amazing wonders Ted McKosky has led us all to!

 Graphically ...
   the Laptops way ...
                      .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Fri May 06, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Somebody forgot to inform the Starlet that it was incapable of any sort of
graphics display. See BOXES.COM for a dazzling display of boxes within boxes
within boxes ...  An entrancing, hypnotic way to relax after visiting the fine
pictorial gallery offered by BDVIEW.COM.
  A salute to J. Patrick Harrington for the techniques that lead to the
preparation of these programs!

 Graphically ...
     the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Mon Nov 14, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Folks interested in more serious programming for the Starlet might like the
SANTA.BAS file in Library 8 - it is a runnable ZBasic program but even without
ZBasic the source code should make interesting reading. The program accesses
the Starlet's clock for seconds, minutes, hours, days, months, and year.  In
case you din' know it, there is no DATE$ or TIME$ available on the Starlet,
even with ZBasic.
 If you just want the program without the source, then download SANTA.COM
which is the compiled SANTA.BAS - but requires 64k mode as well.

 Programming ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 ************
 Tue Oct 27, 1987
JRIGGLE 
Sub: Starlet-printer...HELP!!               
Parameters for a serial printer with a Starlet  
 ************
 ------------
Category 5,  
Message 1         Tue Oct 27, 1987
JRIGGLE                      (Forwarded) 
 
I have just purchased a Starlet and a Big Blue Printer.  My problem is that
the Starlet doesn't seem to want to take the parameters for the  printer. 
When I enter the parameters at the "type mode of serial LPT" prompt all I get
is an "invalid data" message.  I've tried entering the 

info every way I can think of (including the way the book says) but no luck. 
Has anyone else had this problem?  Is it just a matter of the  proper syntax
or is it just that my brand new Starlet doesn't like me? Thx for any help.
JRIGGLE
 ------------
 Wed Oct 28, 1987
NEIL.SMITH [Sysop]  
 
"serial LPT" sounds like a contradiction--are you using a serial or parallel
printer?  Is this in WordStar-To-Go, or somewhere else on the Starlet? Does
anything happen if you try and print without doing anything to the 
parameters?
  Let me know,
  Neil
 ------------
 Fri Oct 30, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
JR:

   Picked up a Starlet for firstest time in my life late Wednesday!
 Having a FASCINATING time lern'n to write programs for it in E-BASIC.

   As to the printer - we need more input. Had trouble at all going   straight
to  pmy Epson. But there are several set-ups needed.

 1) From the main MENU, you use "Option" and then "Printer" function keys -
The prompt is then "Select type" and all you need to do is press either F-1
for Parallel or F-2 for Serial. That is that.

 2) When in WordStar, there is a chance to choose the printer, but I just left
it at the default since I plan no special printing. All was fine.

 Bester luck ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 p.s.
 Watch for some Starlet goodies in the coming weeks!
 Right here! [In Library 8, that is.]
 ------------
 Sat Nov 07, 1987
JRIGGLE  
 
Thanks to everyone for the help.  I was having a syntax problem when enter ing
the parameters of my printer.  Everything working fine now. Thanx again.  Jim 
 ------------
 ************
  Fri Oct 30, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.] 
Sub: Starlet NEC 8401 & E-Basic programming 
Comments, tips, help for programming the Starlet NEC 8401A in E-Basic and
using EBAS as well as ERUN.COM.
 ************
 ------------
 Fri Oct 30, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 Say hey thar Starlet crew!  Wednesday evening I picked up an NEC 8401A, which
I'd never laid eyes on afore now. Also, I've never played around with CP/M in
the least bit [or byte].

  This afternoon I conquered the mysteries of getting reverse video, cleared
screen, and cursor positioning done from E-BASIC.  Standby for some new
programs for your Starlet!

  Would appreciate hearing from folks with Starlet E-BASIC experience that
have covered the ground already. Methinks I'm ready to do some real
programming, but all hints/tips would be welcomed!

 Lotza fun programming ...
     the Laptops way ...
                             .^Dave^.

 ------------
 Sun Feb 14, 1988
A.LAVIOLETTE  
 
WITH ONLY 32K ON THE STARLET, THERE IS NO WAY TO DOWNLOAD  EBASIC.LIBR (37K).
SO, IS EBAS THE ONLY WAY TO CREATE .INT FILES IN WORDSTAR?
 ------------
 Sun Feb 14, 1988
A.LAVIOLETTE  
 
What about ERUN.COM? Can we create .INT files in Wordstar to use with
ERUN.COM, without using EBAS.COM? Or is there any other way? With thanks, Andr
Laviolette
 ------------
 Sun Feb 14, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Andre:

  Nope, ERUN.COM can do it's work ONLY on the .INT files that can be prepared
ONLY by the EBAS.COM program. Methinks you're rapidly finding that you need to
expand your Starlet with either a disk drive or RAMpack from Node Systems.

  With your current capacity, ZBAS is your best bet for fooling around and
creating your own programs. Forgot about size when I steered you to the
EBASIC.LBR file. Within that library file is EBAS.COM at 12K; the ERUN.COM you
have is 11K plus. Thus, for you to create BASIC-E programs using just the 32K
that you have, you'd have to:

  1) Write your program in WordStar non-document mode to have an ASCII source
code.
  2) Load your EBAS.COM to compile your THISUN.BAS into THISUN.INT
  3) Kill EBAS.COM
  4) Load your ERUN.COM and test your program with: ERUN THISUN.INT
  5) First few dozen tries, your program would crash with many errors.
      IF NOT SUCCESS THEN 6 ELSE 9
  6) Kill ERUN.COM
  7) Edit your THISUN.BAS in WordStar non-document mode.
  8) GOTO #2
  9) Success? Wild cheers and whoops of joy!

  Even WITH a full 64K mode capacity, programming with EBAS requires much,
much patience. That's why methinks ZBAS.COM might be better for you. By next
weekend, I'm expecting to have more help files/programs here.

 Enjoy programming ...
      the Laptops way ....
                         .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
J.LEVINSON  
 
Is it posible to download an 8401 program to my Mac and then download it to   
to my 8401?  Sort of using the Mac's disk for storage.
 ------------
 Sun Nov 20, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
J.L.:

   That's what I do a lot with my PC-compatible; I've had no trouble
transferring files via the Starlet's TELCOM program using it's Xmodem protocol
and my fast file transfer program on my PC-compatible. Thus, all you need to
figure out is your Mac's set up to do the same thing. Just make sure your Mac
and your Starlet agree on SETUP; I use 8 bits, no parity, one stop bit,
protocol on for all my fast file transfers with the baud rate at 9600.

 Transferring ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 ************
 Thu Dec 10, 1987
NEIL.SMITH [Sysop]
Sub: Books for CP/M laptops                 
Discussion and recommendations of books for the Starlet, Geneva and/or other
CP/M laptops.
 ************
 ------------
 Thu Dec 10, 1987
NEIL.SMITH [Sysop]  
 
I have not personally read them, but others have recommended Soull of CP/M and
CP/M Bible for serious CP/M users.  They are on sale for about 75% off thru
12/31/87.  Call 800-428-SAMS and order #22030 (Soul...) or #22015  (Bible) for
only $4.99 each.  Be sure to mention you saw them on the "90% off Flyer."
  Neil

 ------------
 Thu Dec 10, 1987
NEIL.SMITH [Sysop]  
 
"A Programmer's Reference Guide for the NEC Starlet 8401" is available for
$20.00 from NEC Home Electronics.  Call Kelly Ryan at 312-860-9500 ext. 4202.
  Neil
 ------------
 Thu Dec 24, 1987
K.REGESTER  
 
Tried the number, NEC really is difficult to get along with.... First they
referred me to local Computerland that never heard of a Starlet. then tried to
sell me a Multispeed. Second call (toll call) resulted in "they're off today
in parts dept. try again monday.." Real swift, no wonder the poor lil' starlet
died of abuse.... -=< More as it develops >=-  I am still looking for a decent
memory map and chip configuration info for USART, etc..   -=< Ken >=-
 ------------
 Thu Dec 24, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Ken:

   Just another reason [computer firms] why Mortimer [actually, my l'il
 Model 100] has consistently advised me ...

 "Patience else patients" ...
     the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Mon Oct 31, 1988
D.WALTERS6  
 
I HAVE RECENTLY AQUIRED A PC-8500. I INSTALLED THE ZBAS.COM INTERPRETER
WITHOUT PROBLEM DOES ANYONE KNOW WHERE TO FIND DOCUMENTATION FOR THE
COMPATIBLE NORTHSTAR BASIC 5.2 ? THE DOCUMENTATION WITH THE ZBAS.COM PROGRAM
WAS SCANT.
 ------------
 ************
Fri Dec 18, 1987
JTJOHNSON
Sub: Saving Starlet files                   
Seeking assistance on saving Starlet files to a cassette recorder
 ************
 ------------
 Fri Dec 18, 1987
JTJOHNSON  
 
All: I have been having problems saving my files to my cassette recorder. I'm
using a Radio Shack "Minisette-15" recorder with all the right cables. Problem
is that sometimes the file is saved; sometimes not.  Other times, I know the
file has been saved, but won't download into the Starlet. Second, is there any
way to generate a directory of what files are on the cassette and a method to
go directly to those files.  That is, a  method without having to watch the
counter on the recorder.   Thanks, Tom Johnson.
 ------------
 Fri Dec 18, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Tom:

   Sorry that I've no Starlet cassette experience, but with the many hours of
struggling with cassette recorders and the Model 100 and NEC 8201, let me
suggest that you experiment with the volume control.  Often "lost" files all
of a sudden appear as if by magic with tender adjustments to volume. For
recording and playback, the middle range has generally been the best.

   As to file directory and jumping to specific file; rather doubt that can be
arranged but perhaps it can be done under special software control. Mebbe
inspection of the CAS programs for the Model 100 will lead us to bright ideas
....

 CAS:ing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Mon Dec 21, 1987
K.REGESTER  
 
May I suggest a few ideas learned during my VIC-20 days; Use even increments
on your tape counter (100,200,300 etc...). Use the 600 baud save rate (PIP
CAS2:=A:<filename.ext> this is more reliable than the 1200 baud (PIP
CAS:=A:<filename.ext> rate. Another tip is to make the first file on the tape
a filer database of file counter  locations. Or simply use a sticky label and
write the filename and locations. Any help at all ???? -=< Ken >=- 
 ------------
 Mon Dec 21, 1987
JTJOHNSON  
 
Thanks Dave and "K.Regester" for the tips.  I'll try 'em. jtj
 ------------
 Sat Jul 02, 1988
CCH  
 
I found that the farther away from my old C-64 I stuck the tape machine, the
better it worked.  
   - Chris
 ------------
 ************
Thu Dec 24, 1987
L.GENCO         
Sub: Kermit for Starlet?                    
Trying to find a version of KERMIT that works on Starlet
 ************
 ------------
 Thu Dec 24, 1987
L.GENCO  
 
I have been haunting the COLUMBIA databases, trying to find a version KErmit
that works with the abbreviated version of CP/M that the StarLet uses.  So
far, I have been unsuccessful.  Has anybody had better luck?
 ------------
 Thu Dec 24, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Lou:

   Gollee! Most of the Starlet folks I've come across are trying to find a way
to PROGRAM the l'il fella!  Methinks you're already in ADVANCED Starlet
status!

   Enneehooo, I'll sure keep an eye out for Kermit but ....

   And Lou, we'd sure be grateful for any programs and/or tip/help files that
you could provide for our Library 8!!

 Starlet-ing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Tue Dec 29, 1987
K.REGESTER  
 
I've had some sucess using IMP244 with the Starlet. I think you'll need a 
version that address's the serial port correctly. The version of IMP that has
worked (marginally!!!) used a serial port at 28hI could upload but not
download without tikmeout errors. I think the problems with Kermit will be in
addressing the serial IO chip and setting the baudrate correctly If anyone can
find out the correct chip types amd locations for the  serial IO we could hack
together a version of Kermit and IMP that work correctly. By the way for
future reference, MAC, RMAC and HEXOM   work very well on the lil' Starlet for
you assembly language users... ---===< Ken >===---
 ------------
 Tue Dec 29, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Ken:

  Ummmm, what happens if you use 2Eh instead of 28h ? Can you fiddle around
with that?

 IMPing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sat Jan 02, 1988
K.REGESTER  
 
I am trying some more on IMP. I had it working last night but only at  300,
1200 baud. I disabled the baud rate setting routine but it still works 'tween
my Starlet and the C-128 in CP/M mode I'll have totry it on the Amigatonight
too. I'll reassemble it and after i test it all out, i'll u-load the full
version for those with diskdrives.
 ------------
 ************
 Tue Nov 26, 1985
GENIE                
Sub: NEC Starlet & Epson Geneva
This is the Category to Discuss the NEC Starlet and Epson Geneva.
 ************
 ------------
 Sun Dec 21, 1986
CHARLESHALL  
 
12/20/86
     If you are familiar with the public domain EBASIC or with  CBASIC running
under CP/M, I'd greatly appreciate some help. I  want to run EBASIC on my NEC
8401A Starlet laptop, and so far it  seems to work fine. But I need to know
more about syntax required  for certain statements and functions. In the help
file which  accompanies EBASIC, it says that it's a subset of CBASIC. The 
help file lists the usable statements and functions but without  syntax; I've
tested the majority and have found the syntax to be  standard. However, there
are several which I haven't been able to  pin down. Besides syntax, I've made
a few notes where I need more  specific info. STATEMENTS: -
OPEN,CLOSE,DEF,RANDOMIZE
            -FILE,OUT (what do these do?)
            -DIM (what are limits of dimensioning arrays? do 
            string variables need to be dimensioned? if so, what 
            is maximum length?) FUNCTIONS:  -RND,FRE,POS  
            -INP (what does this do?)   
     Thanks for helping! Once I have this info together, I'll  post an
addition to the EBASIC help file on the CP/M and LAPTOPS  BBS's. This should
be useful to others wanting to use EBASIC in  the future.

Reply to me here or EMAIL (preferable) to CHARLES.HALL

 ------------
 Mon Mar 09, 1987
C.M.SANDERS  
 
I am thinking of buying a laptop. A suplus company is dumping something called
KYOTRONIC 85 for $150. Does anyone know if this is the same as the TANDY 100?
Looks like it. Worth It?  And someone else is dumping NEC STARLET for $399. 
Anyone had any experience with it? I get tired of carrying my Mac around. 
Need to check a network frequently, but do not need to do much on line.  Need
to type away from office and dump later,  no sophisticated formatting needed.
 ------------
 Tue Mar 10, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
    Factor to keep in mind as far as the Starlet is concerned is the CP/M
system used. If you're familiar with CP/M, then fine - if not ...

                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Wed Apr 01, 1987
DDPRICE [Diz]  
 
The Kyutono is basically the same as the Model 100  except that it does not
have a modem. Best to steer clear and opt for the Starlet.It is easy to use
and can be found cheaper then the price you quoted.Just look! I use mine all
the time when traveling.I have promised Mortimer that I would put a story
about it in this board and will eventually.You will like the 80 column
capability and the built in software. If you want to know more, drop me mail
at DDPRICE.
 ------------
 Sat May 09, 1987
DON.RUSS [KLUGE.LOVER]  
 
I have a second hand Starlet that has croked.  Seems to be a problem in th the
power-supply section in that the main logic has no power but the secondary
chips have p       secondary chips have power.  Ineed to get a manual that has
a schenatic or  at worst an address that I can send it to to get it fixed. 
Please drop me a post card as that I may be away from the service for some
time and might not read the mail soon enough. The address here is: Donald E.
Russ 29 North Main St. Bainbridge, NY  13733 (607) 967-3105

thanks for taking a look I'll reward any effort.
 ------------
 Sat May 23, 1987
G.W.HARRIS  
 
This message is in reply to both C.M. Sanders and Don.Ross' inquiries on this
BBS. Several months ago, I bought an NEC
Starlet 8401A from a closeout specialist in Minneapolis. The price was about
$500.  This morning, I have received another brochure from the same
outfit, and they are now selling the 8401A for $298! I had no problems in
getting my Starlet from these folks, so I'd recommend that you look into
buying a  new Starlet from them.  Name, address, and phone of  this
closeout company follows: Damark International 7714 Brooklyn Boulevard 
Minneapolis, MN 55443 800-533-3379
 ------------
 Tue Jul 14, 1987
C.M.SANDERS  
 
Bought a surplus Starlet for Email and wrinting on the go. I use it it to dump
o Mac for fiormatting and printing. Does anyone know of available Ram Carts?
Other accessories? Thanls...Clate
 ------------
 Wed Jul 15, 1987
NEIL.SMITH [Sysop]  
 
I think some of the official NEC stuff is still available, but it may  be hard
to find a dealer that carries it.  The main third-party support  for the
Starlet would be from Purple Computing in Camarillo, CA.  (805- 987-4788).
  Good luck,
  Neil
 ------------
 Thu Jul 16, 1987
C.M.SANDERS  
 
Well,  still  looking for a hit in the laptops RT.  SOFTTEAM  has  changed
their name and focus.  NODE phone number is disconnected.  Still  looking  for
source for STARLET accessories.  NEC has  RAM  CARTS and CRT/DISK adapters, 
but they want more for them than  I  paid  for  the computer.  Anybody found
any third  party  memory? 
 ------------
 Fri Jul 17, 1987
NEIL.SMITH [Sysop]  
 
Purple Computing in Camarillo, CA has been selling Starlet RAM cartridges  for
years, and to the best of my knowledge still are.  I'm pretty sure  there's no
third-party CRT controller, and I don't think there's a  third-party disk
drive.  As for software, many of the public domain ones  which allow terminal
configurations (to set it to 16 lines) should  probably work.
  Good luck,
  Neil
 ------------
 Wed Jul 22, 1987
DDPRICE [Diz]  
 
I am selling my complete Syarlet system as noted on the board under NEC. I
have the Starlet, CRT/Disc Adapter, Floppy disc system, 1200 Baud modem, 32K
Ram, Purple Computing 128K Ram, all for $600.00. You can't beat that price!
Let me know if you are interested in parts and I will consider all offers. I
went Toshiba for the larger screen. Leave GE Mail to DDPRICE if interested.
 ------------
 Fri Dec 18, 1987
G.DOUGHTIE  
 
Where can I find a Starlet or Geneva for $100-200?  If you've got one for
sale, I can be reached (voice) at (713) 528-5605.  Thanx.
  -=Gavin=-
 ------------
 Fri Dec 18, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Gavin:

  As you shop, keep in mind the large differences between the Geneva and the
Starlet.

  Geneva comes with BASIC ROM chip as well as a Utility ROM that includes
simple telecommunications programs and CP/M functions [not DDT or ASM]. Geneva
has no editor, spreadsheet, or filer program as an integral part of the
original. A lot of excellent programs are available here though.

  Starlet comes with a superior telecom program including Xmodem capability
but NO Basic at all!. Has CP/M functions built-in [not DDT or ASM] as well as
WordStar, Calc [spreadsheet] and a simple database. Support is growing here,
and will continue to do so, with BASIC-E program capability as well as
compiled programs with .COM extension that can be run without need for another
program.

  Both the Starlet and the Geneva really need RAM expansions and/or disk
interfaces to be made of more than slight use.

 Shopping ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sat Dec 19, 1987
G.DOUGHTIE  
 
Actually, either sounds fine.  I've no need for BASIC, just a simple editor
with word-wrap, a modem, and a com program that can handle XModem.  My thought
is to use it for no more than 20 pages of on-the-run writing at a time, then
upload the files here and pull them down later at my office, or just bring the
thing in and cable it to my ST.  I'd like to be under 6 pounds and $200.00 for
this capability, if at all possible.  Anywhere you might suggest to look?
  -=Gavin=-

 ------------
 Sat Dec 19, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Gavin:

  With those specifications, stick to the Model 100 or Starlet. Don't believe
the Geneva can help you without $$$ for RAM expansion while you can "get by"
with either of the others.

  As to "where", methinks you'll have to get lucky! Watch here and at local
computer stores with regular bulletin boards as well as your local electronic
BBs. User groups aren't very good sources --- they're generally dedicated
folks.

 Best of luck ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Tue Feb 02, 1988
H.REID  
 
There is a file refered to in the file PX QUESTIONS that I can not seem to 
find.  The file is FILECO.EXE.  It is run on a IBM machine and will talk to o
the Epson PX8 resident program.  Does anyone know just where the file
file may be located???
 ------------
 Tue Feb 02, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
H.R:

 I'll track that down; the Question file came from another source and as of
now we don't have that FILECO.EXE, but I'll get it! [We hope.]

 If you were online with your Starlet, one l'il recommendation. In your TELCOM
setup, be sure that your Setup has DEL CODE set for 08. That is equal to CTRL-
H and is the default setting here on GEnie but not on the Starlet.

 Starleting ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sat Sep 10, 1988
J.LEVINSON  
 
I just bought a Starlet and have seen an ad in Computer Shopper offering  disk
drives for the 8500 series.  These are supposed to work with the 8401 as well,
but do they need the disk adapter unit??  Also, can I download pro-   load
programs from GEnie to my Mac and then transfer them to the 8401? anthanks.
 ------------
 Sat Sep 10, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
J.L. from Hawaii:

   Would be amazed if the disk drives you saw in Computer Shopper did NOT need
the adapter unit - suggest you telephone the number to see what the situation
is and if the adapter is included and/or available from them. Please, please
report back your findings!

    As to up/downloading - much of the Starlet material here for both the 8401
and the 8500 has been transferred from/to my Tandy 1000 and my l'il Starlet;
the Telcom in the 8401 will handle Xmodem transfers, all you need is suitable
software in your Mac to do the same thing via null modem.

 Good luck ...
  MAC <--> CP/Ming ....
       the Laptops way ...
                         .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sun Sep 11, 1988
C.DEMARCO  
 
In reply to J. Levinson's question regarding Starlet/Mac communication: I've
been using my Mac+ to collect and hive CP/M programs for my NEC 8500 quite
successfully. I'm using a imagewriter I (old printer) cable for the interface,
and RedRyder as the Mac side terminal program. Work's perfectly once
parameters are set identically on oth sides (you can set baud up to 19200,
though I uestion whether the actual transfer aceives that speed). Next, I have
a a PC-8500/Starlet HARDWARE QUESTION: I purchased an NEC PC-8508A ROM/RAM
cartridge with my chine.  It works fine as added RAM, but the manual makes no
mention of the type of ROM chips it uses? Does anyone know what type of ROM's
this would take, and if there are commercial services that would transfer ams
to ROM? It would be great to be able to put a compiler or interpreter in ROM!
 ------------
 Sun Sep 11, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 Technical manual that I have for the Starlet 8401 has the addresses that are
involved for "user ROM" but doesn't specify the type of ROM to be used.

 More questing ...
     the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Fri Nov 18, 1988
DARLINGTON  
 
Hello C. DeMarco... Have you ever found a supply for ROM chips for the PC-
8508A? I have one too and would like to be able to install other utilities in
it. I sent mail to you but have no idea whether you got it or not. It was an
Xmodem file and may have been cancelled before you recieved it.
 ------------
 Sun Nov 27, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
if anyone has any info for burning ram chips let us know! also be on the
lookout for crt/disk adapters ram or any other toys for the 8500 we are in
need to upgrade this fine system BTW has anyone xferred between the amy and
the 8500 ? are there any specifics as to the null modem used?? Thanx for the
help and I hope you all did not eat too much turkey! :> Dan
 ------------
 Tue Nov 29, 1988
C.DEMARCO  
 
To: Darlington - Sorry I never replied to your mail message, but got it just
before traveling.  With regard to burning ROMs for the 8500, I haven'tfigured
out any details yet.  One potentially useful example is the EPSON Geneva; the
CP/M roundatble has some files on how  program and burn ROMs for that machine,
but I haven't followed up to see if there might be similarities to the 8500. 
As a general note, I observed someone else inquiring about using Macintosh to
store files.  I can comment that Red Ryder terminal program on the Mac and the
standard TELCOM on the 8500 make an excellent combination for transfers.  And,
the MacLink Plus program has an excellent translator program that does a very
good job of translation between the 8500's Wordstar files and the Mac's
Microsoft Word.  Hope this is helpful!

. .
 ------------
 ************
 Thu Jan 28, 1988
KGPETERS             
Sub: Starlet Spreadsheet: Calc-to-Go        
Questions, comments about using Calc-to-go, the spreadsheet bundled with the
Starlet
 ************
 ------------
 Thu Jan 28, 1988
KGPETERS  
 
Calc-to-go in the Starlet seems to have one irritating limitation -- no way to
do exponents.  I need to use the Starlet to do compound interest calculations,
which require either exponents or logs.  I can write something in Basic-E to
do it, but it would be nice to use the spreadsheet.  The manual says nothing
about exponents or logs, but it does have a function that returns the natural
logarithm base, E, which suggests a logarithm function somewhere.  Has anyone
else run up against this?  I suspect calc-to-go is a boiled down version of
CalcStar, the spreadsheet that MicroPro did.  Does anyone have any experience
with CalcStar?  What is the command for doing ex- ponents or logs in CalcStar?
If I'm lucky, maybe it's the manual that is lacking and not the software. 
HELP !
 ------------
 Thu Feb 16, 1989
DARLINGTON  
 
Can anyone tell me if there is a way to use the Calc-to-go files with
SUuperCalc2.  I have tried averything I can think of and it will/they wil not
load.
 ------------
 Fri Feb 17, 1989
JRILEY  
 
I'm no expert and don't have my desktop NortthStar running to check this out,
but my reading of the Calc-To-Go manual, on page 4-30/1 says that in saving a
sperexx spreadsheet you must save it not in the C dommxx command withxx but
with a D command (9ixx in the DIF format). "Select D," says the manual, "if
you plan to use your spreadsheet with a ... program that uses the DIF format
(DIF stands for data  interchange programxx format).  Several of the popular
spreadsheet programs for desktop computers use this format.  If you plan to
use your file with Calc-To-Go, then select C for Calc format.  NOTE: If  you
use the f5 function key to save your spreadsheet you will be  choosing Calc
fomxx format.  Pressing f5 is the qxx equivalent of typing /SC.  Try this and
let me know if it works for you.

 ------------
 ************
 Thu Mar 27, 1986
GEOFF [GEOFF]        
Sub: Starlet Usage                          
forum on STARLET usage. how do you use it?
 ************
 ------------
 Thu Mar 27, 1986
GEOFF [GEOFF]  
 
I have had a STARLET for close to a year now.  I use it in work analysis ata
bank.  The portability is an important feature. I have a Purple Computing 128K
memory cartridge which really helps both memory storage and portability-wise.
I will be purchasing a NODE single disk-drive.  It is
compatible with NEC's equipment but does not need the NEC interface unit to
work. I have a line on disk-based software for the STARLET.  The wholesaler is
SOFTEAM at 800 847 6383.  Call for a local distributor.  Their catalog has
around 90 titles for sale specifically for the 8401.
 ------------
 Sun Apr 06, 1986
GEOFF [GEOFF]  
 
NODE reached at 408-462-3773. it will have products for the Starlet. the disk
drive and RAM cartridges (up to 256K).
 ------------
 Sun Dec 21, 1986
CHARLESHALL  
 
12/20/86
     If you are familiar with the public domain EBASIC or with  CBASIC running
under CP/M, I'd greatly appreciate some help. I  want to run EBASIC on my NEC
8401A Starlet laptop, and so far it  seems to work fine. But I need to know
more about syntax required  for certain statements and functions. In the help
file which  accompanies EBASIC, it says that it's a subset of CBASIC. The 
help file lists the usable statements and functions but without  syntax; I've
tested the majority and have found the syntax to be  standard. However, there
are several which I haven't been able to  pin down. Besides syntax, I've made
a few notes where I need more  specific info. STATEMENTS: -
OPEN,CLOSE,DEF,RANDOMIZE
            -FILE,OUT (what do these do?)
            -DIM (what are limits of dimensioning arrays? do 
            string variables need to be dimensioned? if so, what 
            is maximum length?) FUNCTIONS:  -RND,FRE,POS  
            -INP (what does this do?)   
     Thanks for helping! Once I have this info together, I'll  post an
addition to the EBASIC help file on the CP/M and LAPTOPS  BBS's. This should
be useful to others wanting to use EBASIC in  the future.


Reply to me here or EMAIL to CHARLES.HALL
 ------------
 Wed Jul 08, 1987
C.M.SANDERS  
 
Ok, I bought a NEC Starlet that Nec was dumping.I wanted it to keep  in  touch
with my office and an EMAIL net that I Sysop  for.  Seems crude compared to my
Mac but much lighter,  I am satisfied.  AH but there must be some periphs out
there. I am in a small town  and do my computer shopping by mail.   Is there
anywhere that has  the RAM Catridges (PC-8406A)?The CRT adapter(PC-8441A)? Any
small  battery  disk  drives  like the ones available  for  the  TRS100? 
Anybody out ther who knows?  Any other memory expansion available  beside the
RAM carts? Any good software here? Turn me on someone. I tried to post this in
a catgaory that is appropriate,

but Cat 5 came up NO SUCH CATAGORY. Post it in the appropriate

place or tell me where. I have already asked Traveling

software for info. Thanks...
                              C.M.Sanders

 ------------
 Fri Jul 10, 1987
NEIL.SMITH [Sysop]  
 
I am not sure who carries the NEC memory, but Purple Computing and Node 
Computers are the most popular third-party suppliers.  SET 5 would be the 
command to get here.  Also, the Backspace key would work better than the  left
arrow while telecommunicating.  You might want to contact NEC hq in  Illinois
(Elk Grove Village, I believe) to see who carries their stuff.
  Good luck,
  Neil
 ------------
 Thu Nov 05, 1987
DEBULL  
 
You might check with Bob's Close-outs in Omaha, Neb.  for additional peri
periphs for the Starlet.  I bought one from them several months ago and they
had printers, RAM carts. , etc at that time.
    I am looking for any additional programs that might be available for the
Starlet.  I am only using the internal RAM, so length of program is important.
Is there anything on GENIE for the Starlet???

regards,   Dave Bull
 ------------
 Thu Nov 05, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Dave:

    Sure hope you found Library 8 here on Laptops RoundTable after you left
your message! Currently I'm engaged in writing/adapting programs for the
Starlet with folks like you specifically in mind - internal RAM being the only
space available.

    Since getting my Starlet a week ago, I've been busy and you'll find both
*.COM and *.INT programs in Library 8 that will run in your Starlet in
"Portable mode" as you have reported.

 Lotza fun ...
    the Laptops way ...
                      .^Dave^.
 ------------
Category 5,  
Message 9         Fri Nov 06, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]          at 18:07 EST
 
Dave:
    DO keep watching; will be making even GREATER progress by the end of this
month ...
  Careful with those cursor keys folks, use the DEL key on the Starlet or the
BKSP key on most other computers.

  And all of you CP/M and Starlet folks! What's your pleasure?
 Games? Business? Lemme hear from you!

 Lotza goodies coming ...
     the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Thu Nov 19, 1987
S.PLATYPUS  
 
there is a discount house offerring the starlet for $249. They state that
there are peripherals available from nec. Dak has also lowered the cost of the
px8 Geneva to $499 equipped With many goodies. Decisions Decisions hope this
helps someone Dan
 ------------
 Sat Dec 26, 1987
P.CLEVELAND [Grover]  
 
OH HELP! After years of portable computing on the NEC8201 I bought a Starlet.
Now I need to Find a NODE disk drive - are they still in business? They aren't
at the same place at least. Any advise appreciated.
 ------------
 Sat Dec 26, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Grover:

  Node Systems Incorporated handles 128K and 264K RAMdisks for the Starlet ---
installed a 128K for my Starlet a few months ago, super!

  Howsomeverwhichway, methinks they no long have disk drives. Their telephone
number is (916) 477-6706.

 Starlet-ing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Thu Dec 31, 1987
K.REGESTER  
 
On the disk drives; I bought the last (so they said??) N0DE drive made It is
possible to get NEC drives used, there are some problems with using the N0DE
drive to d-load (timeout errors) to; the drive is fairly complicated (uses a Z-
80 u-processor, + a WD1770 disk controller chip so it would be hard to dupe
one + it uses an E-prom for Z-80 I think they are going to hang onto the
copyright for the design too! anyhelp???? -=< Ken >=- [KJ4ZF/KL7]
 ------------
 Wed Aug 03, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
rec'd the nec 8500 in no time flat! I havn'y played with it much biut it looks
like a rela WINNER! the screen display is exceptional and will easily blow the
socks off the tandy! and the price is hundreds cheaper! I know it isn't ms-dos
compatyible but really ms dos WAS preceded by cp/m and cp/m IS still an
adequate system wqill report more when I go back and play some more! p/s what
is the address and /or phone for node?? I'd like the crt adapter or ram disk .
doees anyone know of an expansion board?? thanks and neccking the laptop way!
latypus  
 ------------
 Wed Aug 03, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Platy:
     Node Systems = 916-265-4668 and the RAMdisk is certainly what you'll be
needing so that you can have all the benefits of 64K mode of operation. You'll
find far more programs here in Library 8 that'll operate in 64K mode than you
will for 32K mode.
 Expanding ...
   the Laptops way ...
                      .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Thu Aug 04, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
dave, what else is available for the 8500?  at other programs are available
<what> and is there another vendor other than nec ? <node?> is there some type
of expansion board available to allow using 2 items at once? how are the
programs listed here for the nec 8500? thanks I love neccing with my 8500!
sorry about that! Dan
 ------------
 Fri Aug 05, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Dan:
   Methinks that Node is about the only 3rd party delivering any support for
the 8401/8500 now. Certainly, if there is more I'd like to know about it! No
expansion boards of any kind have ever been available; NECHE had the PC-8441A
adapter [disk drive/CRT] and the PC-8431A micro floppy disk drive, but I'm
fairly certain they are no longer available.
    Programs for the 8500 are all in Library 8; keywords used are Starlet
and/or NEC 8401. Some might have 8500 in the keywords, but any Starlet file is
for the 8500 as well.
 NECy-ing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 ************
 Sat Jan 30, 1988
B.SHARP1             
Sub: AC Adapter help?                       
Info on AC adapter
 ************
 ------------
 Sat Jan 30, 1988
B.SHARP1  
 
HELP!, Hi.  I have a 8401A Starlet, and would like to purchase a AC adapter. 
Their is a problem I can't find the answer to. I know I need a 9 Volt, 500mA
adapter, but the problem is with the plug in. Does the Starlet use positive
tip polarity, or does it use negative tip polarity? I can see the type of tip
to use, but now the type of polarity. Any help would be appreciated. Thanks,
Bill Sharp

 ------------
 Sat Jan 30, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Bill:

  The adapter that I bought for my Starlet was Radio Shack's "Archer"
 Cat. No. 273-1651A. It comes with a reversible tip for polarity just as
you're asking about.

  Studying the Starlet manual and markings at the DC outlet carefully, the tip
was inserted, powered up, and I was WRONG!

  The tip should be negative; that means with the specific adapter described
above that the word "TIP" on the l'il green tip should match the mark "-NEG"
on the tip holder at the end of the wire.

 ---- though wrong the first try, it didn't damage my Starlet.

 Adapting ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sun Jan 31, 1988
B.SHARP1  
 
Thanks Dave! I'll go pick one up now.  I was worried about "destroying" my
starlet. Thanks for the insight. Bill
 ------------
 Sun Jan 31, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 Whoops! Another happy member !

 Starlet-ing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 ************
 Mon Jul 06, 1987
CHARLESHALL [CHAS*HAL
Sub: Forth For Starlet?                     
Looking for others who may be using or are interested in using FORTH language
on the Starlet.
 ************
 ------------
 Mon Jul 06, 1987
CHARLESHALL [CHAS*HALL]  
 
I'd be interested in hearing from anyone who is currently using the FORTH
language on the NEC Starlet. I would like to get a  public domain version of
FORTH for CP/M 2.2. Any information would be much appreciated.

 ------------
 Sun Jan 17, 1988
GARY-S  
 
Charles,
  Go to page 710 (M710) or just type FORTH at any main prompt. There are
several public domain Forth's for CP/M 2.2 in our over 800 files. Please do
not hesitate to ask me (GARY-S) or the other two sysops D.RUFFER and
S.W.SQUIRES for any assistance.
  I use a Geneva myself and just tailored a F83 kernel for the PX-8 if anyone
is interested. It includes a 8 line lister in the editor.
  Others will want to use either the standard F83 for CP/M or MVP for those
who prefer fig-Forth. Gary
 ------------
 ************
 Sun Aug 02, 1987
JTJOHNSON            
Sub: Help with Starlet Directory???         
 ************
 ------------
 Sun Aug 02, 1987
JTJOHNSON  
 
All: Three days ago, my Starlet -- in the portable mode -- was working fine. 
Today I turned it on and, while all the ROM programs seem fine and show up
properly in the menu, my created files are not to be found.  Specifically,
there is nothing but garbage characters where the four or five file names used
to be, as well as garbage throughout all the file name locations on the menu. 
(The now "file" names are a mix of ASCII-type characters.) The main menu shows
that I have 19K bytes free in RAM, but when I try to create a file, I get an
"Error 27 - Directory Full" message. I also discovered that my fairly new set
of "C" batteries had dropped to zilch.  (And I handn't been running off the
batteries at all.) It appears that somehow my directory was scrambled.  Is
there anyway to restore these file/file names, or will I need to reformat and
re-write the files from scratch?  Tkx, Tom Johnson
 ------------
 Wed Aug 05, 1987
DDPRICE [Diz]  
 
Tom,
  I have had similar problems and you need to use your AC adapter to keep the
Starlet from draining your C cells. I always took the adapter and basically
left the batteries for the time I was transporting the Starlet. You may
possibly save the files by calling them up in WS non document mode and saving
them off to an external RAM Cartridge or to another computer. That was one
thing about the Starlet (at least mine) was that it loved to eat batteries. 
You might go to Duracells or even those new 1.2 Amp Hour Nicads.  My Starlet
is now retired while I use my T1100+.
   Godd Luck,
   Dorsey
 ------------
 ************
 Sun Feb 21, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
Sub: Starlet NEC PC-8401 & ZBASIC programs  
For help, tips, information on programming the Starlet in ZBASIC from Zedcor.
Please do not confuse the North Star-like ZBAS.COM public domain program with
ZBASIC which is an advanced interactive Basic compiler.
 ************
 ------------
 Sun Feb 21, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 Okay Starleteers! You've seen some programs up in Library 8 that have been
written in ZBASIC. Now we've had a major breakthrough!

 Pat Harrington has come up with the solution to accessing the Starlet's
clock. As we knew, it requires a machine language call.  Though I could be
wrong, most likely ZBASIC is the only way that the clock will be accessible.

 Most likely, the same means [demonstrated in ZBCLOCK.BAS] will lead us to
doing graphics work of suitable quality.

 Please, please keep in mind that ZBASIC is totally different from, and
unrelated to, the public domain program ZBAS.COM. Unfortunately, the
documentation, ZBAS.DOC, uses the term ZBASIC when it means ZBAS.

 ZBASICing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Tue Mar 01, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 Graphically speaking, Pat Harrington has done it again! GRAPH.COM in Library
8 shows WHAT can be done in ZBasic with graphics, while the companion
GRAPH.BAS shows HOW  it is done.

 Starlet 64K mode required; ZBASIC.COM required for playing with *.BAS files
but not for running .COM files. Iteration: not ZBAS.COM.

 Didn't experiment to see if the demo version of ZBASIC could handle the
GRAPH.BAS file - someone holler their results!

 Applications programs folks?
 Applying ....
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sun Jul 24, 1988
MFS  
 
Dave,

After trying my luck with Zbas and E Basic, I'd like a little more info on
ZBasic.  I assume it has many more functions available.  Could you list some
of these and other advantages. I realize it is a commercial program.  Is the
price right?

 -Mark-
 ------------
 Sun Jul 24, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Mark:
     Have you picked up ZBDEMLAP.LBR, file 1645?  Methunked that had a lot of
info and capabilities, except that you can't compile a program with that
demonstration version. The "price is right" for ZBASIC from Zedcor IF you have
expanded your RAM to at least 128K or have a disk drive so that you can use
64K mode of operation.  Otherwise, you're very limited - as an example, note
that ASCII.COM here will run in 32K but the parent program, STARLET.COM,
requires 64K mode of operation.
      Hollar at me more if you've got all you can from the demo program.
 Lotza fun ...
  ZBasicing ....
     the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sun Jul 31, 1988
MFS  
 
Dave: I'll download the demo file tonight and have look. I do have the 128K
ram cart, so 64K mode is available. Thanks. -Mark-
 ------------
 Sun Nov 27, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
dave, where is zbasic from?? where is it marketed and what does it cost?? I
have plenty of ram carts but I am also wondering where or how we get to 64k
mode  on the 8500 help? platypus
 ------------
 Mon Nov 28, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Dan:
    Maybe I'm misinformed, but I was under the impression that the 8500 was
VERY like the Starlet 8401 in major matters. To switch from 32k mode to 64k
mode it is necessary to have either RAM expansion or disk drive already
connected and ready.  With that done, you should press SHIFT-f2, the "Option"
key, and then f4, the "Mode" key.  If your setup is capable of 64k, you'll be
advised that you'll lose internal RAM files - if okay, then you're all set.

     In Library 8 there is the ZBDEMLAP.LBR file with a demonstration version
of Zbasic - it is fully operational except that you cannot compile .BAS
programs into .COM programs the way that I've done. Full information is within
that file - which needs 64k mode to use.

 Listening ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 ************
 Tue Mar 15, 1988
A.LAVIOLETTE         
Sub: Starlet NEC PC-8401A and ZBAS.COM      
Comments, tips, help for programming the Starlet in ZBAS.COM.*s
 ************
 ------------
 Tue Mar 15, 1988
A.LAVIOLETTE  
 
ZBAS.DOC refers to North Star Basic stating that ZBAS is fully compatible with
it. I would be interested in obtaining any documentation of the North Star
Basic syntax. I am especially interested in the display commands (PRINT, TAB
(?), punctuation (,;:)), in order to understand how to control screen output.
ZBAS.DOC (File #1538 in Library 8) is silent about that.
 ------------
 Sun May 01, 1988
MFS  
 
As a new owner of an 8500 and a beginning programmer, I would also be
interested in more documentation for ZBAS, and opinions on other alternatives.

-Mark-
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
D.WALTERS6  
 
Does anyone know where I can get good documentation for ZBAS.COM? i HAVE the
program, but only micro-documentation. HELP!!!!
                             Sincerely,

                               Dan Walters
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Dan:

   If you have ZBAS.DOC [file 1538] from our Library 10, that is as good as it
gets - to the best of my knowledge.  Perhaps you could find a library book on
Northstar Basic which could help.
   Suggest that you take a hard look at ZBasic from Zedcor, which has no
relation to ZBAS.  See file 1645, ZBDEMLAP.LBR, which is a fully operational
demonstation version of ZBASIC.COM except that you cannot compile programs the
way I've done for you Starlet folks with the .COM programs here that are
Starlet specific.  ZBasic does need 64k mode, so either RAM expansion or a
disk drive is necessary for use.  Most of my programming has been done with
Node's 128k Datapac, but I've also used the NEC 8431A disk drive.

 Programming ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
D.WALTERS6  
 
dave, I cannot believe you replied to my inquiry while I was online. WOW!  I
have an NEC 128K RAM/ROM cartridge, but don not believe it will allow 64K
mode.  I don't have any docs for the cartridge yet, so I'm not sure.

Thanks for your help!

                               Sincerely,

                               Dan Walters
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Dan:

    Not familiar with the NEC cartridge, but it SHOULD permit 64k mode
operation even if it only has banks of 32k.  Best thing to do is TRY it! Don't
need documents other than the Starlet manual.
    From the main system menu, press Shift/f-2 and then f-4; if you have your
cartridge installed, it will let you go to 64k mode after asking if it is okay
to lose the files in normal RAM.

     When I started this reply, you were still down here. But most likely you
won't get THIS one until you return.

 Explicating ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 ************
 Sat Jul 16, 1988
CCH                  
Sub: Starlet external Terminal Programs?    
The built in VT100 terminal program does the job, but I'd like more.
 ************
 ------------
 Sat Jul 16, 1988
CCH  
 
Is there a terminal program around that will run on the Starlet 8500 and allow
me two simple, but much desired features.  Namely, the ability to set up my
Function Keys for each system I call, and the option to go into Split/Screen
mode.  Thanks!
 - Chris
 ------------
 ************
 Sun Aug 21, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
Sub: Starlet NEC PC-8401 PC-8500 Telcom     
Logon procedure for use with the Starlet NEC PC-8401A and PC-8500
 ************
 ------------
 Sun Aug 21, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
  These are the prinicipal settings that matter; they are the same on the
newer 8500 as on the Starlet 8401:

  CONNECTION     MODEM [for internal use, RS232 for external modem]
                        [similarly, set SPEED 300 for internal]

  Protocol       ON       DEL CODE 08
  Word Length    7        LF SUP   ON
  SI/SO          ON       LINE DELAY 0
  STOP BITS      1        PRINT     OFF
  PARITY         IGNORE   SAVE      ON
  XON/XOFF       ON
  ECHO           OFF

     That's for logon; when on, you can pop back into SETUP and change the
ECHO to on.  T'is best NOT to fool with ^R.  Not necessary; when logging on
you SHOULDN'T see anything until the greeting banner.

  2) Dial 321-9876 [f'instance]
     Using the internal modem, at INPUT? prompt, type:
     3219876/M/T  [RETURN]

 ------------
 Fri Sep 02, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
Help help elp I have tried to get in usaing the 8500 but for some reason I am
not succedding I use your login sequence above and I included the /m/t BTW is
there supposed to be cvapitals on the slashmslasht?? if there is and I try it
and it woiks I'll let you know. Dan ps anyone know of inexpenseive ram carts
for the 8500? what about having node or purple leave an online catalog for us
to look thru? also someone by the name of dave bull left a message about a
place in omaha but no phone # or address anyone know these?? thanks Dan
 ------------
 Fri Sep 02, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
well I tried the new settings and still no luck! suggestions welcome as I did
buy the 8500 to look in at my friends on Genie while I wsa away from my amiga!
Dan
 ------------
 Fri Sep 02, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Dan:

   Puzzling. We need to know what happened when to prevent your success. I've
had no problems using the method in message #1 this Topic, which is what you
referred to anyway.
   Node Systems is definitely the place to get your RAM expansions; they have
128K and 256K contiguous RAM packs - not 32K banked. 916-265-4668 Listing is
$149 for 128K, $239 for 256K, but I believe may be less.

 Listening ...
    the Laptops way ...
                      .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Fri Sep 02, 1988
EZRA  
 
I'm having problems, too. My theory is that the Starlet dials ONLY pulse,
which won't work on some touch-tone systems. This hasn't been a real problem,
as I carry along an external cigarette-pack modem and everything works fine
going RS232. . . .
 ------------
 Sat Sep 03, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
E:
  Perusing the Manual, it would appear that you just may be correct about
Pulse vs Tone dialing.
   Howsomeverwhichway, let me bermind folks about the REMINDER in the Manual -
repeatedly:  "Be sure the message 'HANDSET' is displayed at the top right
corner of the screen before typing the telephone number or the directory
letter."   I had forgotten about that giving me trouble; since I was going to
use the modem, I thawt MODEM should be displayed.  NO!

    Dan: The Manual indicates that /M/T or /m/t are equally acceptable.

 Telcoming ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Thu Sep 29, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
well thge key is to let genie know that the receiver(us) is at 300 baud! Yep
hre I am laprtopping <= cat induced error thanks for the help Dan
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Since Dan's comment is a bit cryptic, for the benefit of JWSCO and others
trying to logon with either the Starlet or PC-8500, realize that you need to
type HHH just as soon as you are connected.  That enables GEnie to realize
you're at 300 baud [or whatever].
 See message 1 in this Topic for recommended SETUP.

 Logging on ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 ************
 Sat Sep 03, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
Sub: NEC PC-8500 COM port access programming
Help, tips on accessing &/or programming the I/O ports [COM especially] on the
NEC PC-8500 and Starlet PC-8401.
 ************
 ------------
 Sat Sep 03, 1988
MFS  
 
I'd like to dump "pages" of information from a commodity quote machine to my
PC-8500.  Any suggestions on how to open up the "com" port  and input data? -
Mark-
 ------------
 Mon Sep 05, 1988
R.PREUSS  
 
          Mark,
               When you say "com" port I assume you mean the RS232
          port.  If this is true I might have a solution for you.

               If the commodity quote machine can print "pages" to a
          serial printer, you should be able to connect the serial
          output of the commodity quote machine to the  serial port on
          the 8500.  You may need to have a null modem adapter and/or
          build a special cable.  Then on the 8500 use the
          telecommunications program to save the "pages" to a text
          file by selecting DOWNload with "no protocol". (This assumes
          that the commodity quote machine sends standard ASCII to a
          serial printer).

(Sorry about the left margin I wrote this off line and fogot to set the left
margin)        

Bob
 ------------
 Sun Sep 11, 1988
MFS  
 
Thanks Bob, That is basically what I've been doing to cature the data. One
problem arises when I dump the data to the 8500's screen. One "page" has 25
lines of text and 4 or 5 extra linefeeds,which cause the screen to continue to
scroll.  A (shift-F1) is the only way to stop the inp [C [ to stop the input. 
Therefore, I thought a small dedicated program might be my besbe my best
choice. -Mark-
 ------------
 ************
 Wed Oct 05, 1988
S.PLATYPUS           
Sub: ram carts for nec8500 $49 +$5 shipped! 
After searching high and low I have located a source for nec 8500 ram carts 
128K for $49 plus $5 shipping! source is PC Systems and they have thousands!
 ************
 ------------
 Wed Oct 05, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
TaDaa trumpets blast! We have found a source of ram for our starlets!!!! The
source is called PC Systems Their address is 3705 shares place #6 Riviera
beach,FL   33404 # 1-407-863-8446 Buy several ! Dan the bargain hunter!
 ------------
 Wed Oct 05, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Dan:
    Vital question: is that 128K contiguous, or is it in banks of 32k? Makes a
mighty big difference for using different programming languages such as ZBasic
or the C compiler that is available commercially.
 Questing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Wed Oct 05, 1988
EZRA  
 
I believe these are the authentic NEC parts. When I bought my "liquidated"
8500 from Software for Less (I b'lieve that's the name) in Michigan, guess
where the machine and accessories actually came from. . .  PC Systems in
Riviera Beach.
 ------------
 Wed Oct 05, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
ezra the place is known to software for less! they referred me! did you get
one? can you use more than one and swap mem packs? power down and then swap
the packs?? dan the great white bargain hunter of the north
 ------------
 Wed Oct 05, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
mortey, looks likw we have found a hot one here! Now if I could only find a
diskdrive with connector cheep! oy! dan great whwite bargain hunter of the
north!
 ------------
 Thu Oct 06, 1988
EZRA  
 
Dan--did you ask PC systems about disk drives? They're acting as source for
Software for Less with all the Starlet stuff (hell, even the visa charge slip
was made out to PC Systems), and the S-F-L liquidation ads mention disk
drives. . . .
    As to the RAM carts: sure, you can power down and swap 'em, but there's no
way to hook up more than one at a time. They run off either the same AC
adapter as the starlet itself (there's a jack) or an internal lithium battery.
I guess you can plug in the adapter every six months or so when you have to
replace the battery, so the carts are pretty good as permanent storage.
However, they are kinda bulky -- about 3" wide and the same length and height
as the starlet.
 ------------
 Thu Oct 06, 1988
EZRA  
 
Okay. I called PC Systems. Here's what they have:
    AC Adapters $10
    128K Ram carts $49
    32K Ram carts $20 (?)
    Spelling checker Rom cart $29
    Printer cables $20 That's it. The disk drives were gone in August (sigh).

PS: I just opened my 128K NEC RAM cart, and guess what -- four empty 28-pin
ROM sockets! Anybody have any idea what to do with these??
 ------------
 Thu Oct 06, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Fascinating!  But I'm still asking, are those 128K RAM cartridges made up of
32K or 64K banks, or is it 128K contiguous RAM the way the Node DATApacs are
sold?

 Questing ...
   the Laptops way ..
                    .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Fri Oct 07, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
ezra morty anyone, is the spelling checker worth it?? dan
 ------------
 Fri Oct 07, 1988
EZRA  
 
1. Dave: I haven't played with the cartridge much, but the docs say nothing
about filesize limitations or anything else that would indicate bank
switching. Seems to be a contiguous ramdisk.

2. Dan: I dunno about the spelling checker, but I ordered one. I'll report
when I've tried it. I actually got it because I'm thinking of having a friend
burn some software into ROM and trying those empty slots, and I thought it
might be easier to peel header/OS data off the spelling checker than taking
apart the Starlet itself. . . . (whoops--make that "sockets," not "slots"
above.

--Ezra
 ------------
 Sat Oct 08, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
Attention ALl! they are liquidtion their holdings of NEC 8500 stuff! They also
have romware?? Real Estate Planenr er planner Insurance planner Speller to go
as well as the 128K paks Marked down !!!! Please call 1-407-863-8446 to get
current plrices! I forgot to write them down (sigh) but they dropped the ram
prices so I ordered 2 for the price of 1! This is the Buy of a lifetime Go for
the jugular on this one! Ps anyone figure out what to do with the rom slots on
the expander???? dan
 ------------
 Sat Oct 08, 1988
EZRA  
 
Marked down? Huh? Now that drives are no longer available, I ordered 4 128k
carts on thursday at $49. Are you telling me they dropped the prices further
on friday???? This could be _very_ irritating, y'know.

And yes, what _can_ be done with those sockets?

 ------------
 Tue Oct 18, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
ezra yep they marked them down again! to $29 for the rqm carts and I got my
spell checker and it isn't too bad! The insurance planner is an aid for the
salesperson but not too bad for $10 anyone else find any nec stuff? also how
do we get to use swap data to the ram disk?? dan
 ------------
 Tue Oct 18, 1988
EZRA  
 
I don't understand your question really. The ram cart is simply a psuedo
drive. Plug it in, power up, run the format command (odd, but that's the way
it works), and it becomes your B> drive. That help???

 ------------
 Fri Oct 21, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
ezra, I was looking for help in remembering how to pip but if finally rtfm'd
the thing. BTW have you found a copy of sweep or some thing similar to run on
our stats? foud anyother other stuff ?? I ordered an extra power pack frommtm
also. BTW they put somesoftware on BO and then still charge me for it. I
called and they were very helpful nd set the record straight. I am thinking of
ordering some other ram disks like you did. but I will have to see if having 2
is good enough just in case another sisk  drive becomes available.(I can dream
can't I?) dan
 ------------
 Sun Oct 23, 1988
EZRA  
 
Yeah, I got a whole bunch of utilities of various sorts, including a public
domain version of DDT, the latest rev of DU (with which I'm hoping to figure
out what's actually happening on those RAM "disks") and a bunch of other
goodies. I've even found a shareware utility that will allow me to read my old
Kaypro disks on an AT clone, so I have access to a number of things I thought
were lost to me forever. You want me to upload? 
 ------------
 Sun Oct 23, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Ezra:

  Speaking for myself, my Starlet, and all the Laptop members with the 8401 or
8500 - Y E S !!  Please upload any goodies you can for our l'il fellas. Do
check the listings in Library 8 though; we have DDT, for instance, but maybe
your's is more recent or better in some respect.

 Eagerly ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sun Oct 23, 1988
M.JEW [Mel]  
 
Yeah, this might be a dumb question, but what kinda software is out ther
 for the 8500?  Seeing that it has more RAM than my Model 100 and I do need
lots more for lengthy jobs, I would love to get one at THESE prices!

Problem is, the Model 100 is so well established that all the software I need
are coming direct from GEnie.  What kind of software runs on the 8500?  The
same as the Model 100/102's?  

Also, I read in the next to the last issue of Portable 100 that the 8500 does
not have an internal modem.  Is there a slot for one?

Thanx for all of the info so far!!!   Mel
 ------------
 Sun Oct 23, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Mel:

  The NEC 8500 has the CP/M operating system and can use a lot of those
programs. However, due to many different factors, most software for the 8500
must be specially tailored for it. Library 8 here has software for the 8500,
which is similar to the NEC 8401 Starlet.
  NEC 8500 very definitely canNOT run Model 100 software; amony other things,
the 8500 does not have a programming language, such as BASIC.
  There is an internal modem [300 baud] for the 8500; can't imagine what the
reference might have been in Portable 100 that led you to think it didn't have
one. Also has an RS-232 port which I've used for the WorldPort 1200 external
modem - no room inside the case for anything.
  Suggest that you inspect other topics in this Category and the listings in
Library 8 for further information - Topics 5, 11, & 13 would be of most value
here.

 Pointing ...
     the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Wed Oct 26, 1988
EZRA  
 
Okay. I'll try to upload this weekend, in between writing my Byte column and
preparing my session talk for the Mac Business Conf next tuesday (btw, is
eppley coming down for that one??). Playing with cp/m software will be a good
way to procrastinate (grin).
 ------------
 Sat Nov 05, 1988
MFS  
 
HOLY RAM CHIPS! If anyone is interested in the ultimate in low cost ram packs,
you better call PC Systems and order a hand full of the "NEC Insurance Expert"
software packages.  These little gems have a PC-8407A (128k) ram cart
included.  There's even a spare battery included.  I ordered one and have
three more on the way. If anyone has the "Real Estate Expert" package, I'd be
interested in buying or trading for it. Happy Ramming,
 -Mark-
 ------------
 Mon Nov 07, 1988
MFS  
 
I forgot the best part.  The cost is only $10 + shipping! -Mark-
 ------------
 Tue Nov 08, 1988
EZRA  
 
Ouch!!!!!
 ------------
 Wed Nov 09, 1988
JRILEY  
 
Today I bought 5 Real Estate rampacks for $10@ and a RAM/ROM pack for $29.  PC
Systems has Spell-to-Go for $19.  The Real Estate package is the same as a
128K RAMpack, with disposible software inside.  This is a great bargain for
Starlet/PC-8500 users and  much cheaper than the previous message suggests!  I
am in search  of anyone who can help/tell me how to burn ROMs for these
machines and am also looking for a NEC snap-in second drive for my diskdrive. 
Let's here from you, please.




s
 ------------
 Sun Nov 20, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
where did you find the real estate rampacks and would you be willing to part
with one? does your source have any more to sell?? let us have ALL the good
news!! Dan
 ------------
 Wed Nov 23, 1988
JRILEY  
 
Prices are lower than you quote at PC Systems.  I bought Insurace programs
(include 128k rampacks and a lithium battery) for $10@, a RAM/ROM cart for
$29.  They're selling the speller cartridge for $19!!!
 ------------
 Sun Nov 27, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
now if we could only find a source of software/firmware like the insurance
program  or the realestate planner BTW does anyone know of a source for the
lithium battery in the ram/rom carts?? lets keep looking  for goodies maybe
someone will dump more for christmas!!! Dan
 ------------
 Sun Dec 11, 1988
CAROL  
 
Freind of mine just bought 3 Real Estate packs, 1 regular 128k RAMpack, and
Speller from above and they have hundreds left according to hom, total cost
$80.  Check it out.
 ------------
 ************
 Sat Oct 29, 1988
C.NISNEWITZ          
Sub: NEC ROM?RAM Cartridge                  
Memory expansion for the NEC Starlet
 ************
 ------------
 Sat Oct 29, 1988
C.NISNEWITZ  
 
Purh chased the NEc Rom./  /Ram cartridge (PC-8508A) for the Starlet PC 8500.
It has 128K of r\am   am memory and sockets for 4 rom chips. Like to know if
any proh grams are available on rom chips and if not what companies a can burn
in programs on chips. CRAIG
 ------------
 Sun Jan 22, 1989
JWSCO  
 
I also have NEC 8508A and cannot find anyone who lnows about chips or programs
foor it. Do have a friend who has an EPROM programmer and will help if I can
determine what chips to use. If you come up with any answers I would
appreciate input.

 ------------
 ************
 Sat Nov 26, 1988
D.VANDENBRO1 [Dav]   
Sub: Help w/Geneva and SP-1000              
I'm looking for some advice on a mystery printer
 ************
 ------------
 Sat Nov 26, 1988
D.VANDENBRO1 [Dav]  
 
I bought a used Epson Geneva a couple months back, and the deal included a 
Seikosha SP-1000 printer.  There was no manual for the printer, however.  I 
called Seikosha America, who identified the printer as a SP-1000I.  They 
offered to sell me a manual for $15, and it's on its way.  However, while  I'm
waiting, I'd like to see what the printer can do.  Does anyone know  whether
the SP-1000I emulates anything, like an Epson or an Apple?  I'd  like to know
the printer codes for the various special functions.

This printer supposedly was originally purchased with the Geneva from DAK.  
This is odd, because it's a parallel printer, and the Geneva has only  serial
ports.  DAK claims they've never sold SP-1000I's, although they have  sold
other models of the SP-1000.  I'm still trying to figure that out,  with the
help of the person who sold it to me.  He never used the printer  with the
Geneva, instead hooking it up to his AT clone.

Anyone who can shed light on these little mysteries is invited to do so.

--Dav
 ------------
 ************
 Sat Jan 28, 1989
JRILEY               
Sub: Hardware wanted for PC-8500            
Looking for NEC PC-8500 hardware.
 ************
 ------------
 Sat Jan 28, 1989
JRILEY  
 
I am looking for two pieces of hardware to use with my NEC PC-8500.  If you 
have them and are willing to sell, please call me at 213 276-8682 or leave  a
message for me here.  I want: a second disk drive for my NEC PC-8431A. NEC
calls this second disk drive  I also want a 128K Ram
cartridge for the Starlet/PC-8500 manufactured by Purple Computing called the
SideStar.  Thanks.  - John Riley
 ------------
 Sat Jan 28, 1989
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
John:
    Better see SETTINGS.HLP in Library 10 for assistance with your messaging. 
Don't use the cursor keys to edit, that results in a whole bungh of [D and [C
type garbage.
    Whether you find your hardware or not, sure hope you'll share your
knowledge, experiences, and programs with us in Library 8.

 Listening ...
     the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sun Jan 29, 1989
D.WALTERS6  
 
Yes John, there is not a great deal of information out there concerning
programming and etc. for the PC-8500.  It is a well kept secret that  this is
a great little computer.  Please share your knowledge and   programs!!!

     Sincerely,

     Dan Walters
     D.WALTERS6
 ------------
 Wed Feb 01, 1989
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
John:
     Marvellous set of files you've uploaded!  Almost fell off my chair with
delight and amazement!  You were uploading faster than I could process and
publish!
  Many thanks ...
     the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Wed Feb 01, 1989
JRILEY  
 
You're certainly welcome.  Hope to have more for you soon.
 ------------
 Sun Feb 12, 1989
JRILEY  
 
For all of ;you out there interested in programming (burning) ROMs for the PC-
8508A ROM/RAM cartfridge for the nec PC-8500 (and Starlet)  computer, let me
tell you this.  I am informted (partxx pardon my typos) that the correct EPROM
to burn is the 27C256 at 200 ns or better.  The  cartridge takes four of them
(4 x 32 kb).  Hints about the header are found in Chapter 14 of "The Starlet
Technical Notebook for the  PC-8401A," obtainable from NEC after signing a
nondisclosure statement. You deal with Kelly Ryan at 312 860-9500 extension
4202.  She also has microfiches of the NEC PC-8500 tech manual.
 ------------
 ************
 Fri Mar 17, 1989
I.ADAMS              
Sub: Need help with Starlet-printer connect 
I can't get the PC-8500 to work with any printer except an NEC 8023. Hasn't
anyone else had this problem?
 ************
 ------------
 Fri Mar 17, 1989
I.ADAMS  
 
I need to use a PC-8500 with a standard Centronics parallel printer
connection.  It works fine with an NEC 8023, but when hooked to either a Star
NX-10, an Alphapro 101, or a Panasonic electronic typewriter with parallel
interface, the PC-8500 won't operate -- the "low battery" warning light comes
on as soon as the computer is switched on (using the AC adaptor for power) and
the computer screen stays blank. Clearly the printer cable seems to be
draining power from the computer, but I can't find  out how or where.

I'm using the same printer cable that I use for a Tandy 102.  The Tandy works
fine with any other printer except the NEC 8023 (which causes IT'S low battery
light to come on), while the PC-8500 won't work with any printer EXCEPT the
NEC 8023.  I've tried clipping the lines in the printer cable which are
clearly mis-matched (the NEC devices show 8 of the lines as "data in" lines
where everybody else has ground) but that hasn't helped at all.

Does anybody know of the solution?

P.S.  Don't suggest calling NEC. (1) It's next to impossible to get through on
their infernal automatic answering system that hangs up on you (after long
distance connection), and (2) if you do get through to the tech people, they
flatly refuse to even discuss connecting to anything but an NEC printer. 
Nice, helpful folks.  I'll remember that next time I'm in the market for a
computer or a printer.
 ------------
 Sat Mar 18, 1989
D.WALTERS6  
 
I use a STAR NX-1000 printer with the same cable without any trouble.  Have
you tried  installing another printer in the PC-8500 software options?
 ------------
 Sun Mar 19, 1989
CAROL  
 
Setup for a TTY printer and that has worked with a PC8500 here. By the way,
you will have to imbed codes w^P and in non-document mode to print form WS-T-
G.
 ------------
 Thu Mar 23, 1989
I.ADAMS  
 
I can't get far enough to install a different printer!  The printer pulls down
the computer's power supply so that the computer will not turn on!  The only
way to boot the computer is to first disconnect the printer, which says that
there is a problem with the pinouts between the computer and the printer(s). 
I had hoped that someone else had already encountered this problem and
pioneered a fix.

I take it we are all using the Tandy cable and not the NEC cable?
 ------------
 Sun Apr 09, 1989
C.DEMARCO  
 
For what its worth, I have gotten the 8500 to work successfullt with a Hewlet
Packard Thinkjet (serial model).  The cable I'm using (for no good reason,
other than I that I had it around) was designed to connect an Apple LISA/MacXL
to the Apple Imagewriter I printer.  I always thought that it was a fairly
"standard" 25 pin RS-232 cable.  However, if your interested,
 could probably find the pin connections on it for you.
 ------------
Prepared for GEnie's Laptops RoundTable
21-May-1989
