         TRANSFERRING FILES BETWEEN the NEC PC-8500 and
              MS-DOS (PC "Clone") Computer Systems

Almost all commercial programs for file transfer between laptop
and IBM-PC desktop computers require that the laptop also run MS-
DOS (products specifically designed for the Tandy Model 100/102,
NEC 8201/8300, and Cambridge Z88 are the few exceptions).  Lap-
Link, Brooklyn Bridge, and similar programs cannot be used to
transfer files between desktop PCs and the NEC-8500, because the
8500 uses the CP/M operating system.  Fortunately, the TELECOM
program included with the 8500 can be used in conjunction with
many other telecommunications programs on the PC to accomplish
the same task.  While these approaches cannot reach the over
100,000 baud speeds claimed for the MS-DOS products, they cost
far less money!


The NEC PC-8500 manuals show how to transfer files between the
8500 and IBM-PC using TELECOM on the 8500 and PC-Talk on the IBM-
PC.  Almost any other communications program can be used on the
IBM-PC instead of PC-Talk.  The only requirement is that the
program supports binary file transfers using the Modem7 or X-
Modem protocols.  The appropriate commands on the IBM-PC may
differ from those used by PC-Talk.  For example, an article in a
recent issue of PICO magazine described use of the MS-DOS program
Procomm.

An effective alternative to PC-Talk is the HOST MODE of Procomm
2.4.2 or Procomm Plus.  The HOST MODE of these programs is a
"mini-BBS".  This feature eliminates the need to shift back and
forth between the 8500 and PC keyboards while transferring files.
HOST MODE also gives the 8500 some access to DOS on the PC.

The following steps detail how to transfer a WordStar document or
text file between the NEC PC-8500 and a PC:


FROM the NEC to PC:

     1.  Save WordStar file normally (.doc file) and exit
         WordStar-To-Go.
     
     2.  Connect PC-8500 to PC via null-modem (or serial printer)
         cable.  DB-25 male connector attaches to NEC's RS-232
         (serial) port; DB-25 or DB-9 (as appropriate) to PC's
         serial port (note whether it's COM1 or COM2).
     
     3.  Start Procomm 2.4.2 or Procomm Plus (Test Drive) on PC.
         If not already set up, configure HOST MODE for direct
         connection at 9600 or 19200 baud, 8 bits, 1 stop bit, no
         parity.  Make sure Procomm is using the comm port (COM1
         or COM2) used by the null-modem cable.
     
     4.  Start HOST MODE of Procomm by hitting the Alt and Q keys
         simultaneously (<Alt>Q).
     
     5.  Start the PC-8500's Telecom program.  If necessary, use
         SETUP (F1) to configure program for same baud rate and
         parameters (8,1,n) as Procomm's host mode.  Make sure
         PROTOCOL is ON (enables MODEM7 [X-Modem] file transfer).
     
     6.  Hit RETURN on PC-8500.  The logon request (First Name:)
         from the Procomm HOST MODE should be displayed on the
         8500's screen.  "Log on" to Procomm Host as for a BBS.
     

     7.  Select File Transfer UPLOAD from the Procomm Host menu.
         Use X-modem file transfer and enter the name of the file
         (it doesn't have to be the same name used on the 8500).
         Entering a file description is not mandatory.  Once
         Procomm signals it is ready to begin transfer, hit the
         UPLOAD function key on the 8500.  Enter the name of the
         WordStar file used to save it on the 8500.  DO NOT
         SELECT THE ASCII transfer option unless you are willing
         to lose all/most document formatting!  Hit return to
         start transfer.  During the transfer, synchronization
         and block acknowledgements can be monitored on both the
         8500 and Procomm HOST displays.  Procomm HOST will
         return you to its main menu once the file transfer is
         completed.  Additional files may be transferred if
         desired.
     
     8.  If finished, type G on the 8500 to end the Procomm Host
         session.  On the 8500, use the BYE function key (F6) to
         exit Telecom.  From Procomm, hit <Escape> to exit HOST
         MODE, then <Alt>Z to exit Procomm and return to DOS.
     
     9.  The WordStar document file is now on the MS-DOS machine.
         It can be used as is by WordStar on the PC.
         Alternatively, a file conversion program may be used to
         convert the WordStar file to another format.  Word-For-
         Word (WFW) and similar programs will convert from
         WordStar to ASCII, MS-Word, Word Perfect, and other
         programs.  Several shareware and public domain programs
         will strip out WordStar higher-order bits to convert the
         file to ASCII.  Word-For-Word is my preference.  After
         conversion, the document file may now be used by your
         word processor program on the PC.
     
     10. ALTERNATIVE:  If the WordStar file is transferred from
         the 8500 with the ASCII option, it will arrive on the PC
         as an ASCII file with most formatting eliminated.  The
         file can be used directly by most word processors that
         can import ASCII files.  If your MS-DOS word processor
         uses hard carriage returns to denote ends of paragraphs
         (such as MS-Word), they will have to be eliminated from
         the file from within the word processor program or
         manually with a macro.


FROM PC to NEC:

     1.  Save your document file normally, then convert it to
         WordStar format using Word-For-Word or similar program.
         Alternatively, most word processors allow saving a file
         unformatted as more-or-less straight ASCII text.  Make
         sure you save the file or a copy to the upload/download
         directory used by Procomm's Host mode.
     
     2.  Connect the 8500 and PC with the null modem cable (see
         step 2 from "Transfers to PC").
     
     3.  Start Procomm's HOST MODE on the PC and TELECOM on the
         8500 (see steps 3 through 6 from "Transfers to PC").
     
     4.  Select "FILE DOWNLOAD" from the HOST MODE menu.  Select
         X-Modem transfer protocol, and enter the name of the
         file you wish to download.  Once Procomm signals it is
         ready to begin the file transfer, hit the "Download"
         function key from the TELECOM menu on the 8500.  Enter
         the file name (it doesn't have to be the same as on the
         PC) of the file you're transferring.  CAUTION:  For
         large files, make sure you have enough space in RAM disk
         or floppy disk to store the entire file!  Hit <RETURN>
         to begin the transfer.  Synchronization and block
         acknowledgments can be monitored on the 8500 and Procomm
         displays.  Procomm also displays a bar graph to chart
         the progress of the transfer.
     
     5.  Procomm will return to the HOST MODE menu when the file
         transfer is complete.  Additional files can be
         transferred, or the session can be ended (see step 8
         from "Transfers to PC").
     
     6.  The document file can now be used by WordStar-To-Go on
         the 8500.
     

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION:

     1.  Other executable (binary) and ASCII text files can be
         transferred between the 8500 and PC using the same
         general approach (conversion to/from WordStar format is
         only required for transfers between WordStar on the 8500
         and a different word processor program on the PC).  As
         an example, programs for other CP/M computers, such as
         Kaypro, can be loaded onto the PC (via modem from a BBS
         or from a 5.25" Kaypro disk using UNIFORM, 22NICE, or
         other disk conversion program) and then transferred to
         the 8500.  This gets around the 8500's odd-ball disk
         format, and is the only alternative for long-term
         storage and retrieval of CP/M programs without the
         8500's disk drives.
     
     2.  File transfers involving the 8500's disk drives are not
         efficient at 9600 or 19200 baud.  The drives are simply
         too slow.  Attempting to transfer files at high speed
         using the drives will generate too many NACK and TIMEOUT
         messages, slowing the achieved transfer rate.  Set up
         PROCOMM and TELECOM at 1200 or 2400 baud for smooth
         transfers involving the 8500's disk drives.
     
     3.  The HOST MODE in Procomm 2.4.2 allows greater access to
         DOS than HOST MODE in Procomm Plus.  Procomm Plus has
         better status displays, supports transfers at 19,200
         baud, has far better security for files on the PC from
         unauthorized access, but allows no access to DOS by a
         remote user.  Procomm 2.4.2 is available from many BBSs,
         user groups, and libraries as "shareware", with a very
         reasonable registration fee.  A "Test Drive" version of
         Procomm Plus is available from the same sources.  It
         includes "host mode" but very limited documentation.
         The full version of Procomm Plus is a commercial product
         available directly from DataStorm and some retail
         dealers.  Procomm 2.4.2 is sufficient for file transfers
         between the PC and the 8500.  Try Procomm Plus Test
         Drive and buy the commercial product if dial-up access
         via modem to the PC is also desired or if the PC will
         also be used as a telecommunications terminal.
     
     4.  Similar approaches can be used with other computers.
         Several CP/M programs, such as IMP and MEX, support file
         transfers.  Red Ryder is a shareware communications
         program, similar to Procomm, that could be used for file
         transfers with MacIntosh systems.  I do not know if Red
         Ryder has a "host" mode.
     
     
NOTES ON HARDWARE:
     
     1.  A null-modem cable differs from a "normal" serial cable
         used to connect a computer to an external modem or other
         serial device.  Several pins are cross-connected in the
         null-modem cable to properly place data and control
         signals at each end of the connection.  A cable used to
         connect a computer with a serial printer (or plotter)
         has the same cross-connections and will work fine as a
         null-modem cable.
     
     2.  A complete set of cables and adaptors to connect the
         8500 and PC-XT or PC-AT systems includes:
     
               o "Normal" serial cable with male DB-25 connector
                 (for PC-8500) and male (or female, if
                 appropriate) DB-25 connector (for PC-XT).  Also
                 used to connect external modem to computer.
               
               o DB-25 to DB-9 adaptor.  Most PC-AT systems use 9
                 pin (DB-9) connectors on their serial ports.
               
               o Null-modem adaptor (DB-25 connectors) or "serial
                 printer"/"null-modem" cable.  If the same cable
                 is used for a serial printer and the null-modem,
                 only one can be used during file transfers
                 (normally not a big limitation).
               

NOTES ON COSTS:

     o  "Normal" serial cable - about $10 - $20 (more money buys
         better materials and construction -  worth it!).
     
     o  DB-25 to DB-9 adaptor - Costs about $5 or so from Radio
         Shack and other sources.
     
     o  Null-modem adaptor (DB-25 connectors) - about $5;
         serial-printer or null-modem cables cost the same as
         "standard" serial cables.
     
     o  Procomm software - $5 for disk from most "shareware" and
         user group libraries, free from BBSs for version 2.4.2
         or Procomm Plus "Test Drive".  $25-$50 to register
         version 2.4.2 with DataStorm (depending on purchase of
         program diskette, manuals, and support).  About $80 for
         Procomm Plus.
     
     TOTAL COST - $45 ("cheap" cable, minimal Procomm 2.4.2
     registration) to $110 (better cable, commercial Procomm Plus
     software).  In comparison, file transfer packages for MS-DOS
     laptops usually cost $75-$150, do not always include cables
     and adaptors, and are only usable for direct-connection file
     transfers.  Procomm is a full-featured telecommunications
     program.
     

Good Luck & Enjoy!

Stephan Greene, Herndon VA.  September 27, 1988

E-Mail:  NECHE BBS, PICO BBS: Steve Greene
         BIX:  sgreene

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              