
Collected messages concerning the NEC Starlet PC-8401 and PC-8500
from GEnie's Laptops RoundTable 1985 to May 1989

 ************
  Fri Oct 30, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.] 
Sub: Starlet NEC 8401 & E-Basic programming 
Comments, tips, help for programming the Starlet NEC 8401A in E-Basic and
using EBAS as well as ERUN.COM.
 ************
 ------------
 Fri Oct 30, 1987
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 Say hey thar Starlet crew!  Wednesday evening I picked up an NEC 8401A, which
I'd never laid eyes on afore now. Also, I've never played around with CP/M in
the least bit [or byte].

  This afternoon I conquered the mysteries of getting reverse video, cleared
screen, and cursor positioning done from E-BASIC.  Standby for some new
programs for your Starlet!

  Would appreciate hearing from folks with Starlet E-BASIC experience that
have covered the ground already. Methinks I'm ready to do some real
programming, but all hints/tips would be welcomed!

 Lotza fun programming ...
     the Laptops way ...
                             .^Dave^.

 ------------
 Sun Feb 14, 1988
A.LAVIOLETTE  
 
WITH ONLY 32K ON THE STARLET, THERE IS NO WAY TO DOWNLOAD  EBASIC.LIBR (37K).
SO, IS EBAS THE ONLY WAY TO CREATE .INT FILES IN WORDSTAR?
 ------------
 Sun Feb 14, 1988
A.LAVIOLETTE  
 
What about ERUN.COM? Can we create .INT files in Wordstar to use with
ERUN.COM, without using EBAS.COM? Or is there any other way? With thanks, Andr
Laviolette
 ------------
 Sun Feb 14, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Andre:

  Nope, ERUN.COM can do it's work ONLY on the .INT files that can be prepared
ONLY by the EBAS.COM program. Methinks you're rapidly finding that you need to
expand your Starlet with either a disk drive or RAMpack from Node Systems.

  With your current capacity, ZBAS is your best bet for fooling around and
creating your own programs. Forgot about size when I steered you to the
EBASIC.LBR file. Within that library file is EBAS.COM at 12K; the ERUN.COM you
have is 11K plus. Thus, for you to create BASIC-E programs using just the 32K
that you have, you'd have to:

  1) Write your program in WordStar non-document mode to have an ASCII source
code.
  2) Load your EBAS.COM to compile your THISUN.BAS into THISUN.INT
  3) Kill EBAS.COM
  4) Load your ERUN.COM and test your program with: ERUN THISUN.INT
  5) First few dozen tries, your program would crash with many errors.
      IF NOT SUCCESS THEN 6 ELSE 9
  6) Kill ERUN.COM
  7) Edit your THISUN.BAS in WordStar non-document mode.
  8) GOTO #2
  9) Success? Wild cheers and whoops of joy!

  Even WITH a full 64K mode capacity, programming with EBAS requires much,
much patience. That's why methinks ZBAS.COM might be better for you. By next
weekend, I'm expecting to have more help files/programs here.

 Enjoy programming ...
      the Laptops way ....
                         .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
J.LEVINSON  
 
Is it posible to download an 8401 program to my Mac and then download it to   
to my 8401?  Sort of using the Mac's disk for storage.
 ------------
 Sun Nov 20, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
J.L.:

   That's what I do a lot with my PC-compatible; I've had no trouble
transferring files via the Starlet's TELCOM program using it's Xmodem protocol
and my fast file transfer program on my PC-compatible. Thus, all you need to
figure out is your Mac's set up to do the same thing. Just make sure your Mac
and your Starlet agree on SETUP; I use 8 bits, no parity, one stop bit,
protocol on for all my fast file transfers with the baud rate at 9600.

 Transferring ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 ************
 Sun Feb 21, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
Sub: Starlet NEC PC-8401 & ZBASIC programs  
For help, tips, information on programming the Starlet in ZBASIC from Zedcor.
Please do not confuse the North Star-like ZBAS.COM public domain program with
ZBASIC which is an advanced interactive Basic compiler.
 ************
 ------------
 Sun Feb 21, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 Okay Starleteers! You've seen some programs up in Library 8 that have been
written in ZBASIC. Now we've had a major breakthrough!

 Pat Harrington has come up with the solution to accessing the Starlet's
clock. As we knew, it requires a machine language call.  Though I could be
wrong, most likely ZBASIC is the only way that the clock will be accessible.

 Most likely, the same means [demonstrated in ZBCLOCK.BAS] will lead us to
doing graphics work of suitable quality.

 Please, please keep in mind that ZBASIC is totally different from, and
unrelated to, the public domain program ZBAS.COM. Unfortunately, the
documentation, ZBAS.DOC, uses the term ZBASIC when it means ZBAS.

 ZBASICing ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Tue Mar 01, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
 Graphically speaking, Pat Harrington has done it again! GRAPH.COM in Library
8 shows WHAT can be done in ZBasic with graphics, while the companion
GRAPH.BAS shows HOW  it is done.

 Starlet 64K mode required; ZBASIC.COM required for playing with *.BAS files
but not for running .COM files. Iteration: not ZBAS.COM.

 Didn't experiment to see if the demo version of ZBASIC could handle the
GRAPH.BAS file - someone holler their results!

 Applications programs folks?
 Applying ....
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sun Jul 24, 1988
MFS  
 
Dave,

After trying my luck with Zbas and E Basic, I'd like a little more info on
ZBasic.  I assume it has many more functions available.  Could you list some
of these and other advantages. I realize it is a commercial program.  Is the
price right?

 -Mark-
 ------------
 Sun Jul 24, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Mark:
     Have you picked up ZBDEMLAP.LBR, file 1645?  Methunked that had a lot of
info and capabilities, except that you can't compile a program with that
demonstration version. The "price is right" for ZBASIC from Zedcor IF you have
expanded your RAM to at least 128K or have a disk drive so that you can use
64K mode of operation.  Otherwise, you're very limited - as an example, note
that ASCII.COM here will run in 32K but the parent program, STARLET.COM,
requires 64K mode of operation.
      Hollar at me more if you've got all you can from the demo program.
 Lotza fun ...
  ZBasicing ....
     the Laptops way ...
                       .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sun Jul 31, 1988
MFS  
 
Dave: I'll download the demo file tonight and have look. I do have the 128K
ram cart, so 64K mode is available. Thanks. -Mark-
 ------------
 Sun Nov 27, 1988
S.PLATYPUS  
 
dave, where is zbasic from?? where is it marketed and what does it cost?? I
have plenty of ram carts but I am also wondering where or how we get to 64k
mode  on the 8500 help? platypus
 ------------
 Mon Nov 28, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Dan:
    Maybe I'm misinformed, but I was under the impression that the 8500 was
VERY like the Starlet 8401 in major matters. To switch from 32k mode to 64k
mode it is necessary to have either RAM expansion or disk drive already
connected and ready.  With that done, you should press SHIFT-f2, the "Option"
key, and then f4, the "Mode" key.  If your setup is capable of 64k, you'll be
advised that you'll lose internal RAM files - if okay, then you're all set.

     In Library 8 there is the ZBDEMLAP.LBR file with a demonstration version
of Zbasic - it is fully operational except that you cannot compile .BAS
programs into .COM programs the way that I've done. Full information is within
that file - which needs 64k mode to use.

 Listening ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 ************
 Tue Mar 15, 1988
A.LAVIOLETTE         
Sub: Starlet NEC PC-8401A and ZBAS.COM      
Comments, tips, help for programming the Starlet in ZBAS.COM.
 ************
 ------------
 Tue Mar 15, 1988
A.LAVIOLETTE  
 
ZBAS.DOC refers to North Star Basic stating that ZBAS is fully compatible with
it. I would be interested in obtaining any documentation of the North Star
Basic syntax. I am especially interested in the display commands (PRINT, TAB
(?), punctuation (,;:)), in order to understand how to control screen output.
ZBAS.DOC (File #1538 in Library 8) is silent about that.
 ------------
 Sun May 01, 1988
MFS  
 
As a new owner of an 8500 and a beginning programmer, I would also be
interested in more documentation for ZBAS, and opinions on other alternatives.

-Mark-
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
D.WALTERS6  
 
Does anyone know where I can get good documentation for ZBAS.COM? i HAVE the
program, but only micro-documentation. HELP!!!!
                             Sincerely,

                               Dan Walters
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Dan:

   If you have ZBAS.DOC [file 1538] from our Library 10, that is as good as it
gets - to the best of my knowledge.  Perhaps you could find a library book on
Northstar Basic which could help.
   Suggest that you take a hard look at ZBasic from Zedcor, which has no
relation to ZBAS.  See file 1645, ZBDEMLAP.LBR, which is a fully operational
demonstation version of ZBASIC.COM except that you cannot compile programs the
way I've done for you Starlet folks with the .COM programs here that are
Starlet specific.  ZBasic does need 64k mode, so either RAM expansion or a
disk drive is necessary for use.  Most of my programming has been done with
Node's 128k Datapac, but I've also used the NEC 8431A disk drive.

 Programming ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
D.WALTERS6  
 
dave, I cannot believe you replied to my inquiry while I was online. WOW!  I
have an NEC 128K RAM/ROM cartridge, but don not believe it will allow 64K
mode.  I don't have any docs for the cartridge yet, so I'm not sure.

Thanks for your help!

                               Sincerely,

                               Dan Walters
 ------------
 Sat Nov 19, 1988
MORTIMER [.^Dave^.]  
 
Dan:

    Not familiar with the NEC cartridge, but it SHOULD permit 64k mode
operation even if it only has banks of 32k.  Best thing to do is TRY it! Don't
need documents other than the Starlet manual.
    From the main system menu, press Shift/f-2 and then f-4; if you have your
cartridge installed, it will let you go to 64k mode after asking if it is okay
to lose the files in normal RAM.

     When I started this reply, you were still down here. But most likely you
won't get THIS one until you return.

 Explicating ...
   the Laptops way ...
                     .^Dave^.
 ------------
Prepared for GEnie's Laptops RoundTable
21-May-1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                