        VTCRESET.TXT - Adding a reset to your Visual-1050

                                           /\ rear edge of board
                                            |
                         _________          |
                       -|   |_|   |-        |
                       -|         |-        |
                       -|         |-        |
                       -|         |-        5.7"
                       -|         |-        |
              --------*-|         |-        |
              |        -|________ |-        |
              |                            \/
              |                           U50<--------2.2"--------------->
              |                                                           r
             /                           +   ______   -                   i
switch->    /                           ____|      |___                   g
              |                          |  |______|                      h
              |__________________________|                                t
                                               C78
                                                                          e
                                                                          d
                                                                          g
                                                                          e
If you're the type who likes to expriment with your 1050, as programers are
apt to, you probably wished you had a reset switch for those times you've
had a system crash. Well, above is a diagram that shows what I did to add
one to my machine. Be warned though, if you do this, you may void your
warranty (Ha! Ha!).

There are 4 screws on the bottom of the main (drive) unit, they are seated
in deep holes. Remove these and tilt the top cover up and back. On the
right side of big circuit board, about 2.2" from the right edge and about
5.7" from the rear edge, you'll see U50 printed on the board. To the rear
and left of this point is the U50 chip. To the front and right is an axial
lead capacitor, mine has a blue finish; it looks like a small can with a
wire sticking out of each end.

Attach one wire each to the chip, at the pin indicated, and to the + side
of the capacitor. I soldered mine directly to the components. Bring these
wires to the outside of the case; I found a gap at the parallel connector
that was big enough to pass the wires through. Then attach the wires to a
normally off switch, one made for momentary contact is best. And that's it.

Now when you find you can't reset you're machine from the keyboard, just
hit the switch; it only takes the briefest contact to reset. Of course, you
should place a bootable disk in drive A before you do this because this is
a cold reset. The advantage over turning the machine off, of course, is
that you don't shock your components.
